+++
title = "0 About"

+++
A path breatking new approach to the study of Indian Art and religion, the work bases its analysis on the subject on two rare Sanskrit texts, _Sarva-siddhānt-viveka,_ (Critical understanding of all religious systems) and _Jñāna-siddhi_ (Achievement of Knowledge) through which the meaning and identitfication of some of the breadth taking sculptures of India like Elephanta Trimurti are discussed. After introducing the as many as thirty various Schools of Śaivism and “Śākta-Vāma tantras” the date and authorship of the Sanskrit texts are detailed both from North and South Indian perspective and their contents summarized. 

The _Jñāna-siddhi_ is an unknown _Śākta-tantra_ while the other text is an 11th cent Text giving extraordinary insight into the various Śaiva systems that prevailed in India. No other text so far known gives such detailed information on Bhairavas, Kapālika, Kālamukhas, Soma-siddhāntins, and other schools of Śaivam as this text. Both the texts are given in original. The commentator on these texts cites _Svacchānda Bhairava tantra_ extensively that gives a clear picture of Vāma-Śākta ideaology and Bhairava school of thought. With the help of these two texts the author examines the Temples of India and their sculptures. It is seen that Madhya pradesh (Central India) and other regions including Kashmir have leaned very heavily on Bhairava worship and that the temples and sculptures need to be studied from that angle. The study also reinterpret and correct many identifications of Tāntric and other sculptures in great museums of the World as at USA, UK, Germany, France and other Western world, and also in Indian museums. All the revisions are on textual basis and on inscriptions. The art and history of the ancient city of Ujjaini, which seemed to have played a leading role in Bhairava Śaivism is lucidly explained. Both the Sanskrit texts are given in original. With over 24 colour plates and over 100 black and white illustrations, the book revolutionizes the study of monumental art of India and is a must for all the Museums, Libraies and scholars on Indology.
