+++
title = "2\\ Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka"

+++



* * *

The original text _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ is not known to any other source apart from these citations in the commentary of _Jñānāvaraṇa-dīpikā_. It is a very lucid commentary mainly meant to be useful to an ardent student of Śaiva system.

The available text begins abruptly with "_Mantravada_" also known as _Mantravāmi_, and deals with nine sub-sects of Vāma schools of the Śāktas. However from the first sub sect described it is seen that the original should have contained several chapters preceding the present portion as it mentions, "as described earlier" (_prāk ukta vartmanā_) in the very first verse.

The lost portion should have contained the name of the author, and perhaps his date and other biographical details, and may be details about other schools. The name of the author of _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ is not known. It is also not known whether the author has dealt with other schools of philosophy like Vedānta, Mīmāmsa, Nyāya, Bauddha, etc., as has been done by Sāyana Mādhava, the author of "_Sarva-darśanasaṅgraha_". The Śaiva Siddhānta School mentions traditionally the systems of other schools, and refutes them before detailing their own system. It is possible this text _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_, also had details about other schools, that have been lost. The name of the text _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ "understanding all philosophical schools", warrants the assumption. What has survived is only the portion relating to Śaiva schools and a part of Sakta schools.

Sayana does not seem to have known either the text or the author of this _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ for there is no mention of this text in his work Sarva-darsanasangraha assigned to 14th cent. Sayana does not confine his study only to Śaiva system though he treats three sub schools among Śaivas namely Śaiva, Pāsupata-Śaivam and Vīra-Śaivam. He gives other schools, like Bauddham, Ārhatam etc.

## Date of Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka

The available text is, as mentioned earlier, found only in a Tamil commentary by Veḷḷi-amabala-vāṇa-tambiran. As he went to Vāranasi and studied Śaiva Systems there he should have had access to the vast body of Sanskrit texts on Śaiva Systems there. The Sanskrit text _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ is evidently one such work he found at Vāranasi, where it was available in 17th cent. Inquiries at Varanasi and other institutions of Sanskrit manuscripts yielded no result, as none of them are aware of such a text. It is either lost or still in some library yet to be identified. It is also not mentioned in any of the other ably and critically edited āgamas or commentaries published so far as for example the _Svacchanda-tantra_, _Kiraṇa-vṛitti_, _Aṣhṭaprakaraṇa_, _Mātanga-paramesvara_ with the commentary of Bhaṭṭa Rāmakaṇṭa etc. It does not figure also in the exhaustive bibliography I listed by Sanderson in his recent article.1

Regarding the date of the composition, an interesting light is available in the text. At one place the author cites the author of "_Ratna-traya_" as his guru, and also cites two sutras from _Ratna-traya_2. _Ratna-traya_ was composed by _Śrī-Kaṇṭa-sūri_, a disciple of the well-known Śaiva commentator Śrī-Rāma-kanṭa I, who is considered different from Bhaṭṭa Rāma-kaṇṭa II, the son of Nārāyaṇa-kaṇṭa. Rāma-kaṇṭa I is is assigned to the second half of the 10th cent.3 Śrī-Kaṇṭa-sūri, ought to have lived then and written his work _Ratna-traya_ some time in the end of 10th or beginning of the 11th cent. So _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ should be assigned to a date closer to that period, probably to the beginning of 11th cent.

The _Ratna-traya_ has a gloss by Aghora-Śivācarya who lived in the 12th cent. We may therefore conclude that this _Sarva-Siddhanta-Vivēka_ was written earlier than Aghora Śiva, in the 11th cent. As Śrī-kaṇṭa-Sūri was a disciple of Rāma-kaṇṭa, he may be held to be a Kashmiri scholar or who had gone to Kashmir for study. As the author also of _Sarva-Siddhanta-Vivēka_ does not mention Kashmir Śaivam or any of the well known Kashmir authors, it is likely he was a scholar from Central India, as seems to be indicated by his writings. The great Ācarya Abhinava-gupta holds Madhya pradesh as the spring of Śaiva scholarship.

The Tamil Commentator on _Jñāna-āvarana-dīpika_, cites extensively from the other text named _Jñāna-Siddhi_. Though some texts with this name are available it is not known whether the cited text is identical with any of them. The author of _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ mentions this text at one place. Obviously it must be identical with the text cited in this Tamil work.

It is pertinent to point out that the work _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ and _Jñāna-Siddhi_ are important for Art-historians to identify many unidentified sculptures of mediaeval India and also correct some of the identification already provided. For example the _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ says that the Kālāmukhas should wear red sandal paste on their forehead and decorate themselves with _sphaṭika kuṇḍalas_ (crystal ear pendents). The School holds Māhadēva as Rudra and not Bhairava. Everything emanates as an atom (_aṇu_) of Rudra who is the Primordial deity - Mūla-vigraha. Sadaśiva, the lord of the Universe, is eternal: Pasu are of three kinds while the bondage are also three kinds. Paśu adores Śiva for release from the bondage. The aspirant should observe austerities on days of _Aṣṭami_, _Caturdasi_, _Śivarātri_, and _Somavāra_. This system of observance is called _Kālāmukha-vrata_. Initiated by _Śiva-dīkṣa_ and by attaining _Śakti-pāta_ (descent of divine grace) there arise equality in action from which the soul attains freedom. Lord Śiva shines as sun while the individual shines as a star. The unity of _Ātma-Śivasamyoga_ is called _para-mokṣa_. The commentator Veḷḷi-ambala-Vāṇar adds a foot note to this _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ portion saying Kālāmukha school is also known as _Soma Siddhāntam_.4

Thiruvoṟṟiyūr, a village near Madras and which is now a part of the city has an ancient Śiva temple that is celebrated by the Śaivite Tēvaram Saints. It houses an interesting sculpture of Siva -11th cent. The sculpture is seated in _Yogasana_ pose holding his front arms in _chin-mudrā_ like the _Dharma cakra pravartana mudrā_ of Buddha images. The rear arms hold _trisūla_ in the right and _kapāla_ in the left. The upper part of the trident is broken showing only the lower part. This has led to Wrong identification of the sculpture as Lakulīśa rarely seen in Tamil nadu. There is a similar portrayal in the original Vimāna of the same temple, in the _grīva_, which shows all attributes in the same manner wherein the trisūla is clearly visible. I have shown that this is a form of Dakṣiṇā-mūrti. Both from inscriptions and literature it is known that _Soma-Siddhānta_ was expounded in the temple of Thiruvoṟṟiyur in Chola times. From this text it is now possible to confirm that the sculpture represents Dakṣināmūrti the Supreme Deity of the Kālā-mukhās. There are other such identifications possible. The available text of _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ is summarized in the following pages.

This text _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ is important from another angle. It focuses on five sub-sects among the Śaivas named after the sages Kauśika, Kāsyapa, Gautama, Bharadvāja, and Agastya. Among the different schools the Vaidika Pāśupata school receives long passages.

## Introduction to Vāma school

Veḷḷi-ambala-vāṇar provides valuable information about the Śākta System, before dealing with the Śaiva sub sects enumerated in the _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_. The Śaiva school divides various schools of philosophies into two broad categories as "Inner school" and "Outer school". This division is also called in Sanskrit as "Subtle school" or “Inner school” (_Sūkṣmam_ or _abhyantara_) and "Gross Outer school" (_Sthūlam_ or _Bāhyam_). In each school, six systems are grouped. The external School consists of the following six schools:

1\. Lokāyata 2. Bauddha 3. Jaina (Ārhata) 4. Mīmāmsa 5. Mayavada (Advaita) 6. Pāñcarātra (Vaiṣṇava)

The following six are broadly brought under Internal systems

1\. Śaivam 2. Pāśupatam 3. Vāmam 4. Bhairavam 5. Mahāvratam 6. Kālāmukham

The Śaiva school mentioned at the beginning is called _Suddha Śaiva_ "pure Śaiva" and the rest five beginning with Pāśupatam are considered as _Asuddha Śaivam_ "Impure Saivam". The "Pure Śaiva" system also known as _Saumya Śaivam_, "Benign Saivam" is further divided into two parts as "_Karmānta Śaivam_" and "_Jñānānta Śaivam_", on analogy with the Mīmāmsa school called _Karma-mīmāmsa_ (_Pūrvamīmāmsa_) and _Jñāna mīmāmsa_ (_Uttara-mīmāmsa_)5. The Śaiva Siddhāntis are the followers of _Jñāna mārga_. It may be illustrated in the following chart.

Śaivam -> Ābhyantara-Inner -> Śaivam, Pāsupatam, Vāmanam, Bhairavam, Mahāvratam, Kālāmukham Śaivam -> Śaivam -> Saumya, Raudra Śaivam -> Śaivam -> Saumya -> Karmānta (Ritual based), Jñānāntam (knowledge based) Śaivam -> Śaivam -> Saumya -> Jñānāntam (knowledge based) -> Siddhanta Śaiva

Śaivam -> Bāhya-Outer

All schools of Saivas, except Siddhanta Śaivas, are called _ābhyantara_ (_Ahaccamaya_). The _Karmānta Śaivam_ based on ritual is also clubbed with the other five schools that are counted as six systems and held _Pūrva-pakṣa_6 by the Siddhāntins. There is also an alternative definition. The Kāpālika School is considered a branch of Raudra School and a separate sect and so it is counted with Pāśupata, Bhairava, Vāma, Mahāvrata and Kālāmukha schools, and designated as a Raudra school. The Śaivas (both _Karmānta_ school and _Jñānanta_ school) are counted together as Saumya schools, so the schools expounded by the Āgamas, beginning with _Kāmika_ are considered "_Siddhānta Śaiva_".

The Āgamas are not uniform in their approach to classifications. For example the Āgama "_Acintya-viśva-Sādākhya_"7 divides Vāma (Śākta) school into three branches as "Eastern school” (_Pūrva_), "Western school (_Paścima_) and "Beginningless” (_Anādi_). The _Acintya-viśva-sādākhya_ also divides Dakṣiṇa school into four sub schools.8

1\. Mahāvratam 2. Kālāmukham odh 3. Kāpālam 4. Pāśupatam

Śaiva is also divided into four schools, but Siddhānta is divided into two sub schools.

The _Suprabheda-āgama_ divides the Śaiva schools9 into four as

1\. Śaivam 2. Pāśupatam 3. Lākulam 4. Sõmam

However the Jñānanta school which is considered a Saumya school, is called _Parama Siddhānta_.10

The Author of _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ cites a number of verses from _Ratnatrayam_ and also from _Śiva-yoga-ratnam_,11 the later authored by Maṟai-jñānasambandar. The following Vāma Śākta schools are dealt with by the Author of _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_.

1\. Mantra-vāmi 2. Yantra-vāmi 3. Auṣada-vāmi 4. Karma-siddhānta-vāmi 5. Advaita-vāmi 6. Dvaita-vāmi 7. Miśra-vāmi 8. Vāma-siddhānti and 9. Siddhānta-vāmi

Among the Śaiva Schools the following Sub-sects are detailed in the _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_

1\. Kaulam 2. Driṣṭārtham 3. Gāruḍam 4. Vāmam 5. Dakṣiṇam 6. Bhūta tantram 7. Kālāmukham 8. Kāpālam 9. Mahāvratam 10. Pāśupatam 11. Guṇa-Sankrāntam 12. Pravāha-nityeśvaram 13. Vaidika-Pāśupatam 14. Yoga-Śaivam 15. Suddha-Śaiva-yogam 16. Siddhānta-Śaiva-yogam 17. Guṇa-Śaivam 18. Para-kaivalyam 19. Īśvara-Aikyam 20. Pashana-vadam 21. Bheda-Vadam 22. Sama-Vādam 23. Kauśikam 24. Bhāradvāja 25. Agastyam 26. Kāśyapam 27. Śiva-sankrāntam 28. Īśvara-avikāram 29. Pariṇāma-Vādam 30. Śaiva-Siddhāntam

There were some more sub-schools between the Śaivas mentioned by Veḷḷi-ambala-Vāṇar but they are not cited by the _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_. Either they are not mentioned in the original _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ or Veḷḷi-ambala-Vāṇar does not mention them. Instead he cites extensively from _Jñāna-Siddhi_ and Some from _Svacchanda-tantram_, which also appears in the commentary. The understanding of all the schools of Śaiva System is possible only with all these citations. As _Svacchanda tantram_ is in print, I am dealing with them only in my introduction and am not providing the text. But as _Jñāna-siddhi_ is not available I am including that text also in this book.

## Importance of Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka

The importance of _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ may be gauged against this background. It deals with not less than 30 sub schools among the Śaivas that include Kāpālika, Kālāmukha, Soma etc. As stated earlier the _Sarva-Darśana-Saṅgraha_ of Sāyana Mādhava, deals with only three schools, Nakulīsa Pāśupata, Śaiva, and Pratyabhijñā School. The _Sarva-Siddhānta-Vivēka_ turns out to be a very valuable text that throws greater light on Śaiva system that flowered in India by about 1200 CE.

## The Vāma Śākta Schools

The Vāma and Dakṣiṇa divisions of the Vāma school are also called the Sāmbhava school. The Bhairava School is called Dakṣiṇa. There is a third category in this school called Miśra, which is known as Yāmalam that relates to the Worship of Sapta-matas.12 Some schools of the Śaiva system are called by the Siddhāntins as"Inner-outsiders" (_ābhyantara-bāhya_ or _Ahap-puṟac-camayam_) because they adopt a life style such as eating fish, meat and drink liquor which is not acceptable to the Saumya Siddhānta Śaivas. The Śuddha Śaivas do not include them among their groups.

## Common factors among Vāma school

It has been stated earlier that following six systems are "Inner-outsiders".13

1\. Śaivam 4. Pāśupatam 2. Vāmam 5. Bhairavam 3. Mahāvratam 6. Kālāmukham.

We have also noted that the Vāma school (_Sāmbhava_) and the Bhairava school (_Dakṣiṇa_) are categories of Vāma schools. The third in the Vāma school namely Miśram (_Yāmalam_) is generally counted with the Vāma-Bhairava school.

The Vāma school is explained mainly with _Svacchandra Tantra_ and _Ambā Sthuti_.

**Yantra vāmi**: This school considering magical diagrams (yantra), follows the general tenets of the Vāma tantras but holds, liberation is possible only through it. "_Yantra Sarva Siddhi_" the acquisition of mystic powers is the main objective of this school. It lists the following eight great Siddhis.

1\. Aṇimā 2. Garimā 3. Īśitva 4. Prāpti 5. Mahimā 6. Laghimā 7. Vaśitva 8. Prākāmya

They are achieved by

1\. Karṣaṇa 2. Sthambhana 3. Vidvēṣaṇa 4. Mõhana 5. Māraṇam 6. Bhēdana

The follower of this school will acquire both bhakti and mukti. As Yantra is directly the manifestation of Śakti, Siddhi is obtained through it and not by other means, though mantra etc., can be used as auxilaries.

**Auṣada Vāma**: By taking recourse to _Auṣada_ (medicines) that protects the body disordors one obtains a Shining body. This School even holds that movement through space is possible by administering medicines. The school speaks of what it calls _Kāya Kalpa_. On the whole we may say this school is dealt with rather cursorily.

**Karma-Siddhānta**: It may even be called the school of fatalists. It holds no one can control birth, decay, comfort, suffering, old age and death. What is to happen will always happen. So one should act rightly, and act wherever one's mind goes. However one should not be lethargic in comfort or suffering.

**Siddhānta Vāmi**: The Siddhānta vāmi school rejects the eight sub-schools mentioned, that are called external schools. In this text reference is made to "_Suddha Śaivas_" who are the "_Dakṣiṇa Vāma Siddhāntins_". But as this school also advocates eating meat, fish, drinking, sacrificing human flesh as offerings etc the Siddhānta Śaivas do not accept this school of _Dakṣiṇa Vāma Siddhānta_. The Bhairava school is enumerated in _Dakṣiṇāgama_ which emanated from the Bhairava Īśāna face14 (P. 21) The Bhairava school has eight sub-divisions and six auxiliary divisions (_upabhedas_), according to the _Jñāna-Siddhi_15.

**Mantra Vāmi**: The sub sect _Mantra-Vāma_ of the Śākta tradition, holds that reciting sacred hymns alone in preference to other modes will obtain liberation. The mantras used differently by them are _Namaḥ_, _Svāha_, _Svadhā_, _Vauṣaḍ_, _Vaṣaḍ_, _Humpaḍ_. There are seven cores of such great hymns called _Mahā-Mantras_ employed in all sacrifices. All of them are different manifestation of power (_Śakti_). It is called "Mantra" because the word _manana_ stands for all comprehending nature, and the Word _traṇa_ stands for bestowing grace on worldly men. When both these functions of _manana_, and _traṇa_ are unitted it is called "Mantra". It is clear from this that when one practices Mantra sādhana, by obtaining the knowledge of mantra first, Salvation is obtained in Mantra-vāda.

**Advaita-Vāmi**: Advaita-vāmi holds that everything is a transformation of Śakti. Without Such a transformation of Śakti, nothing exists either as _karma_, _Māya_, world, Soul, god, Śiva, Paśu, Pāśa etc. Man attains salvation by this knowledge, even if he is a murderer of Brahmins, drunkard or debauch. There is no question of Salvation only through knowledge. The results of action (ritualistic action) do not disappear without being suffered. Not even crores of action can remove its effects. It is only an ignorant (_ajñāni_) who will say that liberation through knowledge is possible.

**Dvaita-Vāmi**: According _Dvaita-Vāmi_ school there are only three entities Śakti, Paśu, and Pāśa. Śakti is not one. The individual soul has all knowledge like Śakti but this knowledge does not shine because of association with beginningless impurities (_anādi-mala_). One should receive initiation in _Śākta-dīkṣa_ from a guru in order to obtain knowledge and observe the Tantra taught by him. He should worship through _caryā_ (observances) or yoga, or image worship of either various forms of Śaktis or Śakti alone. Such a person will certainly be liberated but not by rituals. Being liberated by knowledge (_Jñāna_) he shines with Śakti. He enjoys freedom from impurities (_su-nirmala_) and gains all round knowledge and righteousness, which are considered their Siddhānta. It is clear that though this school prescribes image worship, and right observances and yoga, it believes that liberation is possible only through _Jñāna_. In the ultimate state, the adherent attains all round knowledge _sarvajñata_ and similarity with Śakti but does not totally merge with Śakti. Hence the school goes by the name _Dvaita-vāmi_, dualistic Vāmi.

**Miśra-Vāmi**: The mixed school of Vāmi, holds that the categories remain mutually separate from each other but are pervaded by Śakti. The main tenets of this school is that everything is Śakti, Śiva, his body, the concealment of knowledge, the soul, its body, and the worlds, are all forms of Śakti. The adherent should practice the path of Śakti _tantra_, should gather liquor (_madhu_), meat (_māmsa_), fish (_matsya_) etc. perform image worship (_pūja_), fire sacrifice (_homa_), repetition of sacred names (_japa_) or meditation (_dhyāna_) and by worshipping Śakti attains liberation. The liberated person becomes the abode of Śakti, _Śāktyatma_. _Śakti_ becomes his _ātma_. He is not separate from Sakti, but is dissolved in Śakti. He also does not believe in multiple lords (_aneka-īśa-vādam_) equal to Śakti. He is pervaded by Śakti as his _atma_, but is never equal to Śakti, the ultimate, and hence goes by the name _Miśra-Vāmi_.

**Vāma-Siddhānta**: The adherent of the Vāma school accepts appropriate teachings of the eight Vāma āgamas (which are not listed). The instruments of cognitions are as described earlier (this early part is not available). Their categories are namely Śakti, Paśu, and Pāśa. The unparalleled Śakti, remains pervading everything. The adherent, practicing Vāma and other (eight) agamic prescriptions, obtains _Śaktipāta_ (grace of Śakti) of either the intense or higher intense catagory, (_Tīvra_, or _Tīvratara_), and attains liberation by _Sāmbhavi dīkṣa_ (initiation). This is further aided by _sad-upāya_, which means the right course; defined as right path (_san-marga_), right knowledge (_sad-jñāna_) and right yoga (_Sad-yoga_). The root of this system, which is grace (_Anugraha_), takes different forms. Śakti should be meditated as Sūrya, the Supreme Power. This school, though not explicit, also seems to advocate liquor, meat, fish etc., as it directs the adherents to follow Vāma texts.

**Siddhānta-vāmi**: Accepting appropriately the tenets of Śāktam commonly told, this school holds Śakti as the creator of the universe, who sppears in thousand forms. Beginning from _Parā-Śakti_ and ending with _Kriya-Śakti_ the mobile and immobile beings of the entire world are varied manifestations of that Śakti; crores of living beings, beginning from Mantreśvaras and others are all her transformation. The different sounds like "_Vas_" that separate the meanings, and various knowledge and the act of knowing, are all forms of Śakti. What ever exists including the world are the forms of Śakti. Even the form of Śiva is Śakti. The follower of this school should adopt the path prescribed in the nine basic agama texts with meaningful understanding. One who followed earlier either the external schools like Vaiṣṇavism or differentinternal Śaiva system like Bhairava schools and receives the grace of Śakti (_Śaktipāta_) through good merits, and commonality of practices, becomes eligible to achieve liberation by initiation (_dīkṣa_) from a good guru in observances of _Vāma-tantra_, and also by understanding the religious observances like _caryā_, _kriyā_ etc. Thus _Siddhāntavāmi_ does not reject the followers of other Schools and States that there are certain common observances between them that give them the eligibility, but ultimately they have to accept the texts of _Vāma-tantras_, and be initiated by a Guru.

Dakṣiṇa Śaivas The aspect of Dakṣiṇa system are demonstrated in texts like _Kāmikāgama_, to exhibit achievements of mystic powers visibly and invisibly, as there is a necessity to create confidence among people. It is for this purpose four different texts namely, _Gāruḍa tantra_, _Dakṣiṇa tantra_, _Vāma tantra_, and _Bhūta tantras_, emanated from four faces of Śiva namely Puruṣa and other manifestations (_Tatpuruṣa_, _Aghora_, _Sadyojata_ and _Vāmadeva_). These Śaiva schools are considered "down stream" (_adhahśrotas_) Schools, expounded by such Mūrtis like Tatpuruṣa and others called Vijñāna kevala (manifestations of pure knowledge). These texts were expounded in conformity with āgamas like _Kāmikāgama_ as dependent texts.

**Gāruḍa tantra**: The Gāruḍa tantra among the four mentioned above, advocates the worship of Tatpuruṣa Brahman, who is the lord of the universe, by which Siddhis mystic powers-are obtained.

**Kālāmukha**: Kālāmukha's should wear crystal ear ornaments, smear their body With red Sandal powder, _putradīpa_ (there is a gap in the text at this point). Kālāmukha (the Aghora face) should be worshipped with these emblems. The instruments of Cognition are mentioned earlier. Pati, Paśu and Pāśa are the three entities that need to be comprehended. Māhadeva who is none other than Rudra and not Bhairava, is the Pati (lord). As he does not manifest independently with out Rudrāmśa this Rudra Māhadeva alone assumes forms like Dakṣināmūrti who is the main deity (_mūlavigraha_). He is Sadaśiva, eternal (_nitya_), auspicious (_Śiva_), and the universal lord (_Jagat-pati_). Depending upon his functions, he is called by different names.

_Pāśas_, _Mala_ and _Māya_, as mentioned earlier are different. The world appears as a result of _Māya_. Śiva is worshipped for release from the bondage of _Pāśa_. The Kālāmukhas worship Śiva on _aṣṭami_ day (8th day of the fortnight), _caturdasi_, (fourteenth day of the fortnight), on _Śivarātri_ day of each month, and _Somavāra_ (Mondays) regularly by fasting and other means. This kind of worship is called _Kālāmukha-vrata_. After initiation with Śiva dīkṣa and depending upon the descend of grace (_Śaktipāta_) the individual becomes pure, when the individual soul shines like a star, while Śiva like the sun. The coming together of individual soul and Siva is called Supreme liberation, _Para-mokṣa_. This observance and path is called Kālāmukha System.

**Kāpāla School**: The Kāpāla system follows the appropriate Kālāmula texts in which the adherent guided by the _Kāpāla-Śaiva-tantra_ and considering himself as Maheśa at the end of (_Samhāra_) final dissolution, dances in the great cemetery. The follower of Kāpāla School goes abegging with human skull in one hand, singing _Sāmagāna_. One who practices this Kāpāla mode of observance is called Kāpāli.

_Pañcārtha_, _Purākalpa_, _Śiva Guhya_, _Pramāṇa_, _Vyuha_, _Ādarśana_, _Padmā_, _Kāraka_, _Sailaka_, _Nṛtta_, _Suduṣprāpa_ and _Siddhārtha_, which are difficult to obtain, are the fourteen means for achieving mystic powers. The Lākula School is then detailed. The three principles of this school are Pati, Paśu, and Pāśa. Maheśvara who dances at the end of deluge in the great eometry is Rudra, the lord of the universe. He is Sadaśiva, the omniscient and omnipotent lord. The ordinary souls are innumerable and are endowed with knowledge only. Śiva alone, has both knowledge and action not others. Karma and Māyā are the Pāśas. Ākaśa is called _tattva_ (entity), Time (kāla) is Māyā. There is no difference between time and Māyā. One who desires release from bondage initiated through _Śivadīkṣa_ should perform daily rites as enshrined in _Kāpāla Śāstra_. He should acquire extreme determination, be indifferent to praise and ridicule follow the path mentioned earlier and eat food obtained through begging. Such a person attains liberation acquiring equality with Śiva. He does not shine like a star but like the Sun; the liberation gives him omniscience different from the earlier stage. So he attains knowledge like Śiva.

**Mahāvrata Śaivas**: Mahāvrata Śaivas accept appropriately the texts of the Kāpāla school. The Mahavrata has _kuṇḍika_, _kuṇḍalam_, snake, head ornament (_sikhāmani_), _upavīta_ made of (human) hairs, which are called the five mudras, the signs of Mahāvrata. The three basic principles in this system are Pati, Paśu and Pāśa; the instruments of cognition in this system are as detailed earlier; among all prananas (cognitive process) the Mahāvrata is considered the best. The omniscient, omnipotent Sadāśiva is Pati, pure and blemishless, cause of all causes. Individual souls are many but possessed of knowledge alone. The omnipotence is only with the Lord Pati, not with individual souls. The bondages are only _karma_ and _māyā_ not ego (_āṇava_) accepted in other schools. One obtaining grace of Śakti, (_Śaktipāta_), should get initiated into the _Śiva Dīkṣā_, as specified in the _tāntra_ of this school. The individual observing _caryā_ (personal ritual discipline) and acquisition of knowledge get liberation. He should wear _liṅga_ (_liṅga dhāri_) either on his head, neck, heart, or above the navel as prescribed in the śāstra. There is no use of _pūja_ etc. but Wearing liṅga alone is sufficient to bestow liberation. He should show devotion towards all human beings and his guru, as he would adore Siva. Even among these, devotion towards human beings, (_jaṅgamas_), is considered the best. The Mahāvratin obtains salvation, within one birth by following the daily rites etc., as found in Mahāvrata Śastra.

Śiva-yoga Mata In the Śivayoga school, the adherents attains equality. With Śiva in form. There are some schools wherein their followers believe that they either reach the same World as Śiva (_Sāloka_) or proximity to Śiva (_Sāmīpya_) but the adherents of those schools do not attain their ultimate longings. In this school Śiva-yoga mata which speaks of equality with Śiva in form, the follower attains "oneness with Śiva" (he becomes Śiva). Equality with Śiva means he assumes Śivas form, which is also called one-ness with Śiva (_Śiva-Sāyujyam_). _Śiva Sārūpya_ and _Śiva-Sāyujya_ are synonyms in this school. Accepting as many adherents can achieve Śiva-hood as possible does not lead to contradiction or multiplicity of Śiva, as the soul attains equality by only the grace of Śiva. The liberated souls are also Śiva but achieve Śivahood by Śiva's grace. Whereas Śivahood is beginningless in Śiva, who is made of the body of _pañca-mantras_ the Śivayogi who achieves liberation through _Śiva Sārūpya_ attains mystic powers like _Anima_, _Mahima_ etc.

There are several Schools of Yoga Śaivas. However four branches of this System, namely _Siddhānta-Śaiva-yoga_, _Anādi-Śaiva-yoga_, _Avāntara-Śaiva-yoga_ and _Yoga-Śaiva_ are dealt with in this text.

## Avāntara Śaiva yoga

This school accepts appropriate to this tenet what has been told by _Para kaivalya_ school. _Praṇava_ according to this school, is considered inert as it is in the form of sound consisting of five syllables. It is the cause of knowledge for all living beings, inspired by Brahma and other divinities who stimulate their senses towards objects of experience. It constitutes the Supreme bondage. Composed of the syllables "_a_", "_u_", "_ma_", "_bindu_" and "_nāda_". Praṇava is realized through yoga. It is pervaded by five gods as souls "_a_-kāra" is "egoism" (_ahamakāra_), "_u_-kāra" is analytical knowledge (_buddhi_).

The five syllables of _praṇava_ are constituted this way. The self knowledge, obtained through these instruments of cognition, comes like waves of waters. "_A_" has Brahma as its god, "_U_" has Viṣṇu, "_Ma_" has Rudra, "_bindu_" has Īsvara and "_nāda_" has Sadaśiva as their gods. These are the five divinities. They have four-courses of action which pervade the three life breadth (_prāṇa_), the accumulation of all these is bondage and release from bondage is salvation and nothing else, because actions like seeing can be prevented by getting rid of them. So _nāda_ is not the supreme Lord. Śiva, who is sentient and different from them. It is he who acts through the five acts in the form of "_ma-kara_" etc. As all of them are in essence Śiva, there is no difference among them. All these omniscient Gods, should be meditated in various forms Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Rudra, Īśvara, and Sadaśiva are the five manifested gods. In what ever form the devotee worships him he takes that form and like _Cintāmaṇi_ (wish fullfulling gem) bestows salvation. Brahmā who resides in _mūlādhāra_, pervades up to the nave through his own power. Viṣṇu, pervades from the navel to neck, Rudra pervades unto the forehead, Maheśa remains in forehead unto the _Brahma-randhra_. Sadaśiva remains engulfing in the midst of them. One should meditate on each a their appropriate seats.

## Yoga-Śaivas

Yoga-Śaivas -> Siddhānta Śaiva Yogi, Anādi Śaiva Yogi, Avāntara Śaiva Yogi, yoga Śaiva

## Suddha Śaiva yoga

Among the _Putra mārgas_ mentioned earlier this school accepts that which is appropriate. Paśu and Pāśa have already been defined earlier. Pati the Lord is Sadaśiva in this school. The other gods like Maheśvara execute his orders. Among the _Pañca-Sādākhyas_, (the five Brahmans) that which is to be worshipped with rituals is called Śiva. He is the Lord of 36 _Tattvas_. One reaches proximity to Śiva by worshipping him through _arccā_ rituals (_sāmīруа_); one achieves the very form of Śiva (_sārūpya_) by meditation which bestows equality with him and that is considered salvation, the ultimate goal of this school. By _sarūpyam_ it is meant that one achieves equality with Śiva and the form of Śiva (_Śiva-samānatā_ and _Śiva-vigraham_) Among the _puruṣārthas_, (the ultimate achievement of human goals) _sārūpya_ is considered the supreme for one to practice. That yoga should be practised according to the Āgamas like Mṛgendra.

Alternately learned men who would like to obtain self-realization can practice the same, though it is a difficult path. This self-realization is called Yogic state that is obtained by "one who has conquered perceptions" (_Jitākṣa_) the state of _Jitākṣa_ is attained gradually by practicing control of breadth (_prāṇāyāma_). This consists of eight fold path - _prānāyāma_, _pratyāhāra_, _dhāraṇa_, _dhyāna_, _īkṣaṇa_, _japa_, _Samādhi_ and _Yoga_. The following are the definition of these words.

_Prāṇāyāma_ consists of two words _Prāṇa_ \- the vital breath, _āyāma_ i.e inhalation and exhalation. _Pratyāhāra_ is turning away the mind from all experiences of comforts and tastes. The mind is trained in this process to prevent the senses from attachments to external pleasures. _Dhārana_ stands for controlling to fix the mind on one's chosen entity, to think about it constantly and fix it again and again on the same. _Dhriṣṇa_ (_jitākṣa_) means to think about the _mantras_ hymns always. Through these _mantras_ the five Brahmans - Tatpuruṣa, Aghōra, Sadyōjāta, Vāmadēva and Īśāna should be invoked in the east, south, west, north and above. The four faces are as prescribed in the chapter on _arccanā_ (worship) whereas the top one that is Īśāna will have no face but is made to manifest only through hymnal invocation. When one is able to steady his mind in that particular state it is called _Samādhi_. _Japa_ is to recite its name, _dhyāna_ is to meditate on that, which involves creating face to face relationship or visualization. This realization of the Supreme state and cultivating the same is the ultimate, which is known as _Suddha-Śaiva-yoga_. The same process is also acceptable to other yogis who can follow their own system.

## Anādi Śaiva Yoga

Anādi Śaiva yogis accepts the tenets from that which is suited to their needs. They hold the _Suddha Vidya tattvas_ as inert beings that do not have the nature of Śiva. On the other hand _Nāda_ is considered _Īśāna Svarūpa_, knowledge form and he is held Śiva. There is no knowledge of object without sound for human beings. _Śivajñāna_ is obtained through _śabda_ only (sound). That knowledge is obtained gradually from Subtle to gross form. The mystic sound _Omkāra_, is created by _nāda_ and _bindu_. The pure knowledge comes through pure path. The seed of knowledge is _Omkāra_, its lord is _Īśvara_, that is _Sadaśiva_ Composed of five _kalās_ (parts) as _a_, _u_, _m_, _bindu_ and _nāda_.

The _nāda_ emanates from the great subtle entity (_mahā sūkṣma_) and from the Subtle form _bindu_ originates. _Paśyantī_ creates _na-kāra_, _u_ comes from Madhyama, and _a-kāra_ is produced by _Vaikārī_. In the midst of it is Maheśa, Rudra, Viṣṇu and Brahma. From the five emanate the five great acts of creations, sustenance, dissolution, concealment, and grace, and for the five acts Brahmā and other Gods emanate. _Kuṭilā Śakti_, comes into being from 36 _tattvas_. _Kuṭilā_ encompasses _Kuṇḍalī Śakti_. _Kuṇḍal_ emanates from _Praṇava_. Thus the creator of the whole world is Śiva who is _nāda_, which is considered his category. One is called pure _Brahman_ and the other _Sabda Brahman_ the later known as _Sadaśiva_. _Sadaśiva_ is _Praṇava_ the cause of everything. So one should meditate on _Omkāra_ as mentioned in Vedas and Śivāgamas. The yogins who desire salvation, always meditate on _nāda_, which is Śiva's supreme form. Vhen the _Sabda tattva_ merges with the supreme yogins atain supreme liberation. When he attains that state he is called "_Laya yogi_".

The Vedic Scholars are hundred times more merritorious than Brahmins. Those who are initiated into the _Śaiva tantras_, are thousand times better than _Veda-vādins_. The patron is superior to the initiates into Śaiva systems. One who wears sacred ash is superior to patrons. The one who performs worship to the Lord is thousand times better than the one wearing sacred ash, the one who knows _mantras_ is far superior to all the Pūjakas. The one who knows the spiritual path is superior to the one who knows _mantras_. One who knows _Prasāda_ (_mantras_) is superior to the knowers of spiritual path. Better than _Prasāda Jñāni_, Laya yogi is considered superior. Among the Laya yogins, the Prāṇa-liṅgin is great. Therefore this mode of practice should be known from the Guru. Those who follow this system are called Anādi Śaiva Yogi.

## Siddhānta Śaiva yoga

The _Siddhānta-Śiva-Yogins_ accept whatever is suited from the common yoga system. There are three principles - Pati, Paśu and Pāśa. Pāśa is called an impure sphere that forms the wall of division. Human life is called Paśu, other living beings are considered without thinking faculty and so categorized as insentient. Enjoyment of pleasures is not possible without human life. If, however, they are referred to as their souls at places it is purely contextual, as the Śuddha Śaivas have defined this position clearly. The human self strengthened by Pāśa (_kāla_), following the path shown by learning, enjoying through senses like _buddhi_ and desire (_rāga_), partakes all pleasures found in _tattvas_, beginning from Māyā upto the World.

The human being's are fond enjoying pleasures. It is _Śiva tattva_ that induces them to enjoy the worldly life so much so _Śiva tattva_ is known as _preraka_ in texts.

The individual soul realizes the worldly things not by their own powers but through Śiva's act. The five fold path of action of the Lord (Pati) called _Siva tattva_, is based on the functions. _Jñāna_ is _Nāda Svarūpa_, while _kriyā_ is through power. When _Jñāna_ and _Kriyā_ are equal the _Sādākhya tattva_ emanates. The _Maheśvara tattva_ emanates where there is more of action than knowledge (_Jñāna_). The _Rudra tattva_ emanates when there is more yoga and less action. Rudra is also called _Śuddha vidyā_. Here the word Yoga that stands for knowledge is called _Śuddha vidyā_. The _Śuddha Tattva_ is eternal and is totally independent. Without actions the above categories do not exist.

Śiva is meditated in his multiple forms in this manner. He is _Nirañjana_, _Śānta_, _Sarvajña_, and _Sarvaga_. Īśvara should therefore be meditated in these different forms. So among the five categories (_pañca-tattvas_) the prominance of Śiva and Śakti are recognized. In Śuddha Śaiva system Vidya is recognized either individually or collectively. _Śuddha Vidyā_ is golden in colour while Maheśvara is white and Sadaśiva is crystal in colour, _Bindu_ is white, while _Nāda_ is red. While meditating seperately they should be invoked in colours as above. Their collective form appears as a faded moon-light that shows everything. Śiva of this form has five faces and four arms, which should be meditated for liberation. The insentient beings that exist only help and so should be considered as Śiva's body. The Siddhānta Śaiva yoga is also called Adi Śaivam.

## Suddha Saiva schools

Śuddha Śaiva -> Guṇa Śaiya, Para-kaivalya, Īśvara-aikya, Pāṣāna-Śaiva, Bheda Śaiviam

## Samavāda Śaivas

Samavāda Śaivas -> Kauśika (_Samāveśa_); Bharadvāja (_Uttpatti Samavāda_; Agastya (_Abhivyakti Sāmya_); Kāśyapa (_Samkrānti Samanvāda_); Gautamīya (_Śivādādhikya vāda_)

## Guṇa Śaiva schools

Guṇa Śaivas consider the whole world is permeated by _guṇas_ \- _sattva_, _rajas_ and _tamas_. Salvation for the adherents of this system comes through the worship of _Trimūrti_. This school is considered a branch of _Śuddha-Śaiva_. In fact they are none other than _Śuddha Śaivas_. There is nothing in this world, which has not got the _guṇas_, either alone or in combination with other _guṇas_. The text _Mṛgendra Śāstra_ clearly states that the whole world is pervaded by _guṇas_. _Pradhāna_ in this school is the cause of action. Pāśa is that which shrouds the intellect (_tirodhāyi_). Paśus are called Sakalas. From Gods to trees and plants are considered of _Vijñāna_ \- _pralaya_ \- _kalas_. The creator of the universe is Brahmā Viṣṇu and Rudra. The Pradhāna is said to be 24 _tattvas_ and are for the enjoyment and salvation of humans. God wills. From _Pradhāna_, _Buddhi_ emanates and that is the cause of the world. From the agitation of _Buddhi_ comes egoism _Ahaṁkāra_ in three forms. The subtle _Tanmātras_ and senses are born out of egoism. From these subtle entities the five basic elements earth, Water, air, fire and ākāśa are born. From these five elements the gross world comes into being; the unmanifest are 24 and Puruṣa constitutes the 25th _tattva_. Puruṣa performs only limited action, and has limited knowledge. Since he doesn't act fully he also creates enjoyments. So he is considered an independent entity, performs only limited functions and is atomic in state (_aṇu_) As he does not understand everything, he is considered ignorant. Salvation is attained only by the worship of Trimūrti. No other deities like Maheśvara etc are recognised here. In this school of Guṇa Śaivas, Rudra alone functions due to the possession of Guṇas; he dissolves the World, protects it and creates it. There is only one Supreme that is Rudra. This concept is postulated in _Svayambhuva āgama_ and _Śiva dharmottara_. So Rudra constitutes the 26th _tattva_. He is the ultimate cause of everything.

Rudra is born of _Pradhāna_ and then Viṣṇu and Brahma are born. As they are the functionaries of pure acts, they are called pure Maheśvaras. The Trinity equal among themselves are established as the gods for the sake of the world. By worshipping them, following their schools of text, salvation is obtained. Even Vaidikas attain salvation through Śaiva path. The Gods like Indra and others are the executors of their (Trinity's) orders. This system is described as Guṇa Śaivam in the text _Jñānasiddhi_. The followers of the school wear _Jaṭācūḍa_ (malted locks), wear sacred ashes, smear themselves with ashes and adore Trimūrti.

## Para-mukti mata

This school called Para-mukti believes by adoring a formless supreme. The Para-mukti is obtained in the Śuddha Śaiva School by _Karma-āvaraṇa_. They accept whatever is appropriate from among the common texts mentioned earlier and recognize the three categories as Pati, Paśu and Pāśa. Pati is formless lord, who is absolutely pure. He is expressed through various words like _Aprameya_, _Anirdesya_, _Analupamya_, _Anāmaya_, _Sūkṣma_, _Sarvagata_, _Nitya_, _Dhruva_, _Avyaya_ and _Īśvara_. The meanings of these words are defined. He removes the bondage of individual soul who is considered _Aṇu_, the instrument through which he acts is Śakti which is sentient. His body is made up of "Five mantras" (_pañca mantra_) which performs the five acts (Pañca-krityas-creation, sustenance, dissolution, concealment and bestowal of grace). These forms are Īśāna, Tatpuruṣa, Aghora, Vāmadeva and Sadyõjāta (Aja). Time has no form and yet performs manythings. Similarly though Śiva is formless, he performs action out of his own will. He assumes forms for helping yogins, and for creating all tattvas for the world. So it is said that he assumes form, it is not considered a blemish. The individual souls, called Paśu are eternal and all pervasive. They are categorized into three as Sa-kala, Pralayā-kala, Vijñāna-kala.

Innumerable souls who are sentient beings, are with forms and without forms. One who is covered by three impurities namely, _māyā_, _karma_, and _mala_ is called Sa-kala. Pralaya-kalas are those who have only two impurities namely _mala_ and _karma_. Those who have only one _mala_ are called Vijñana-kalas. They enjoy all comforts and joy by being in the body. The Paśas are said to be of five kinds in this school as defined earlier. So if one achieves _Śuddha-adhvā_, pure state it is still considered bondage; when equality of action is attained, (_karma samya_) and Śiva's grace descends, the individual qualifies himself for initiation (_dīkṣa_) from a Guru. Initiation is through the path of _aṣṭāṅga yoga_ and not through rituals (_karma-māyā_). By this process one devotes himself to adoration of formless Supreme and attains _Para-mukti_, Supreme liberation. The yogi need not perform rituals but turn his attention from external acts and concentrate on his inner vision. The yogi should meditate on formless supreme, which is like the outer space, a great void _mahā-sūnya_. Otherwise he would become a worldly man like insects among the heaps of grain. If one abandons Śiva who resides in his own self and Worships him externally it is a useless exercise, like one having food in hand licks his elbow. Yogis see Śiva in their heart and not in idols, which are created for ignorant people. Yoga jñāna mata, Para yoga mata, Niṣkaḷa yoga mata, Paramukti mata, and Śaiva sānkhya siddhānta mata areal synonyms.

## Īśvara-Aikya-Siddhānta

_Īśvara aikya_ means identity of the soul with Īśvara in this school, which also accepts common sayings of early schools. Īśvara is blemishless from the beginning in this school, the Individual soul is likewise blemishless; though he is also eternal like Śiva and pure he is without the power to create, Pāśa is considered four fold, but _āṇava mala_ is not accepted in this system.

Māyā is like _Kambuka_, and kalās are like _Tuṣas_, Māyā is the inborn impurity, _sahaja mala_. So the soul is covered with Māyā-mohā and other impurities are considered, the qualities of _Māyā_, _moha_, _mada_, _naga_, _viṣada_, _sosluta_, _harṣaka_, and _vaicitriya_ are the seven inborn impurities _Sahaja malas_. Individual is pure from the very beginning and yet by the will of Śiva he is bound by the pure and impure acts of Māyā. The individual acquires merit and demerit (_puṇya_ and _pāpa_) When there happens equality of _karma_, he attains _Śaktipāta_, and he is initiated into _jñāna-dīkṣa_ (knowledge initiation) by a Mumukṣu or Naiṣṭikācārya and is liberated in this system. Identity of the individual soul with Śiva (_Śiva-aikyam_) is _kaivalva-aikyam_. That is achieved through practise of formless meditation. The adherent should think of Śiva as supremely auspicious, formless, pure, lord, eternally joyful in the form of an effulgent luminary. He must abandon the idea that he is a Paśu (bound) and should consider "I am Śiva'. He is liberated without any suffering. When he is liberated in course of time his form is merged with Śiva inseperably in _sayujyam_. This inseperable union is like water dissolved in water. When he unites with Śiva, he performs his actions, enjoys his own nature untouched by _Māyā mala_.

## Pāṣāṇa Śaiva Siddhānta

Accepting appropriately what has been laid down in _Īśvara-aikya_ School this system holds Lord (_Pati_) as an ever liberated entity, but the individual soul (_Paśu_) is inpure (_samalaḥ_) bound by five bondages (_pañca pāsa_) that are _mala_, _karma_, _māyā_, _tirodhikā-śakti_ and _bindu_. When the soul is devoid of māyā it is considered fettered with inborn impurities. Māyā is called Mohini different from _anaya-mala_. Pati protects Paśu and Pāśa.

The soul that remains bound, approaches a knowledgeable guru when it attains equality in karma and receives _jñāna-dīkṣa_ also called _Śastra-dīskṣa_. Ritual initiation (_karma-dīkṣa_) is meant for those who are too strongly embedded in bondage but _jñāna-dīkṣa_ is for souls with aspirations. By teaching _Śāstra-jñāna_ alone initiation is bestowed and not by other means. There is no sacrificial fire or fireoffering rituals etc in this process. _jñāna-dīkṣa_ means understanding the _tattvas_ through knowledge, whereas ritual initiation is through mind that should be avoided. Liberation is attained through knowledge, which is called _kaivalyam_. The Worldly life (_samsāra_) comes as a result of ignorance (_ajñāna_) and men deeply embedded in worldly life are called ignorant men. A knowledgeable man escapes from _samsāra_ (worldly bondage). One goes to heaven by simply reciting Veda, but returns after hundred manu years whereas, one attains unity with _Śivasayujya_ by _Śiva-jñāna_.

It is the dictum of Śaiva Siddhānta that _Jñāna_ is supreme. There is no yoga equal to _Jñāna_ and no _Vrata_ (ritual observance) equal to _Jñāna_. There is no personal purity equal to _Jñāna_ and no ritual equal to _Jñāna_; there is no sacred centre like _Jñāna_ and no penance equal to _Jñāna_, there is no sacrifice equal to _Jñāna_. Similarly the soul achieves supreme liberation only through _Jñāna_ even in Vedic tradition and not by even millions of rituals (_karma_). Therefore it is necessary that the guru should be a knowledgeable person and not otherwise. Such a guru is obtained by Śiva's grace. The Vedas could be taught for those who are initiated but for the uninitiated Śiva bhaktas, _Śivajñāna_ should not be withheld but taught properly. When liberation is obtained. one remains like a stone. (_Pāṣāṇa-vat_). The incoming impurities of soul are eradicated but the inborn impurities (_sahaja mala_) remain. All other pleasures and pains disappear except that of mala and that liberation means remaining like a stone which is termination of mental suffering in this system.

## Bheda Śaiva School

This school accepts the tenets of _Pāṣāṇa Śaivas_ but selectively and holds Pati, Paśu, and Pāśa are independent. Pasu - the individual soul is shrouded with _Āṇava mala_. By repetition of mantras and by receiving _Śakti nipāta_ liberation is obtained through initiation and not either by _Jñāna_, _Yoga_ or _carya_. One who is initiated belongs to Śaiva caste. There is only one caste that is Śaiva caste and no other. This school does not accept that liberation comes only through _Jñāna_, but is attained by Śiva's _Śaktipāta_. Those who devote themselves to Śiva through devotion (_bhakti_), among all castes, are eligible to receive this _dīkṣa_. The devotee is equal to Śiva and Śiva is equal to the devotee in the Bheda Śaivam, as liberation is assured for all living beings. Direct initiation is advocated for less knowledgeable human beings while for others liberation is immediate. So two kinds of liberations are recognized namely immediate liberation through _nirvāṇaa dīkṣa_ and the other liberation when the body dies. Extreme renunciation _nirvāṇaa dīkṣa_, itself is considered liberation for those who have adopted it.

Renunciation through Vijñāna yoga destroys sins committed knowingly.

Yoga etc., are observances or methods to achieve liberation, but are not mukti. Impurities can be destroyed only through initiation. Also it cannot be removed through _Jñāna_ but only through _dīkṣa_. _Dīkṣa_ can also be attained through sight - _cakuṣdīkshā_.

Sama-Vāda School This school contends that liberation is not only through _dīkṣa_ initiation but also through _Jñāna_ etc. Śiva-pūja confers eligibility for it. The initiates are also expected to follow certain observances (_caryā_). They have to do daily rites of the Śaiva system. The liberation that would come at the death of a body can be obtained only by observing routine rituals. When it is said that only initiation (_dīkṣa_) confers liberation and not _Jñāna_, _Yoga_, or _Caryā_, it is only to praise _dīkṣa_ and not to dismiss _Jñāna_, _Caryā_and _Yoga_.

When one is liberated he attains equality with Śiva with six kinds of qualities (_guṇas_) that are _Sarvajñatā_, _Trupti_, _Anādi-bodhaḥ_, _Svatantratā_, _Aluptaśakti_ and _Anantaśakti_. The liberated souls obtain these qualities equal to Sadāśiva. This liberation is called in this school _Para-mukti_ that admits only equality with Śiva (_Śivasāmya_) and not identity.

## Kauśika Siddhānta

The Kauśika school also called _Samāveśa_ School, has Mahipati as Rishi who was initiated by Tatpuruṣa face (eastern face of Sadāśiva). This school consisting of Āgamas, beginning from _Amsumadbhedāgama_ to _Vīrāgama_, was taught by the Tatpuruṣa face. A liberated soul is possessed of all auspices qualities, becomes omniscient, omnipotent and equal to Śiva. By following Yoga system that is detailed in _Vāyavīya Samhitā_ he appears as if possessed by Śiva.

## Bharadvāja School

Bharadvāja School, also called _Utpatti-sama-vāda_, is found in _Sarvottara_ to _Vātula āgamas_ that emanated from the Sadyojāta face. Bharadvāja riṣi was initiated through sūtras. The liberation consists in this school of equality with Śiva, is created and not obtained through other means. The soul should abandon its old feelings and hold "I am Śiva" (_Śivoham_) considered Samādhi. Feeling that he is Śiva, the soul will become Śiva and this process is also called _Śivayoga_. By this process, the soul obtains equality with Śiva which did not exist before. It obtains all comprehensive knowledge (_sarvajñatā_) and other important dharmas from Śiva and is liberated in this life itself as '_jīvan muktaḥ_'

## Agastya School

This school promulgated by saint Agastya goes by the name, _Abhitrskiti Samavāda_. According to this school _Abhivyakti_ which is a reflection is considered beginningless, and it emanated from Vāmadeva face. The Vāmadeva face initiated Agastya, who is a Brāhmaṇa Riṣi. The individual soul reflects the six qualities found in Śiva by offering ghee with the ladle in sacrificial fire. When the reflection takes place, he shines like Śiva, the Brahman, called _Saccidānandarūpi_, (existance, knowledge and bliss) _sad-asad vyakti varjita_ (He is neither a manifest nor a non manifest) and _sarvagaḥ_, omnipresent. So far as soul is concerned, there is no dispute about its existence and knowledge, that also experiences bliss. By action (_karma_) and knowledge (_Jñāna_) the soul also gains bliss. This school employs the words _samṛddhiḥ_, _paripūrti_, _vāpti_, _akhaṇḍatā_ and _tṛpti_ as synonyms of bliss. This is detailed in "_Ratna-traya_" and also in Vedantas. Ones inherent bliss is obtained by samādhi. So the soul is also considered _sat-cid-ānanda-rūpi_. The soul experiences its own bliss in the stage of Brahman realization, (_atmānanda_). By this the individual soul obtains equality with Śiva (_Śiva-sāmya_) in all round knowledge and the six qualities of Śiva.

## Śiva Gautamya School

The Gautamiya school is called _Śivād-ādhikya-vāda_ (Beyond Śiva). This school holds even Śiva is Pasu, because he is engaged in the five kinds of actions _Pañcakrityas_ \- (creation, sustenance, dissolution, concealment and grace). He can perform these acts only by assuming a form and so bound by bondage as these are different actions. In the case of Sadaśiva there are two Pāśas namely _anugraha_ and _tirobhāva_ (bestowing grace and concealment). Therefore Sadaśiva is considered the first Paśu. The liberated individual soul cannot create like Śiva for he reaches a stage beyond action. So this school considers that the soul goes beyond Śiva (_Śivād-ādhikya vāda_) in the state of liberation.

## Kāśyapīya

This school known as _Kāśyapīya_ is also called _Śiva-Saṅkrānta-vāda_. It is expounded by Mahaṛṣi Kāśyapa. The five faces of Sadaśiva initiated the five Riṣis Kauśika, Kāśyapa, Bharadvāja, Gautama, and Agastya. Out of the Īśāna face emanated the Āgamas like _Sahasrāgama_. Kāśyapa is called Brahma riṣi, who was initiated by the top Īśāna face. The _Raurava āgama_ calls Kāśyapa school as "_Saṅkrānti Śaiva_" This school accepts appropriately the Sama-vāda school, but holds Pati the lord alone as sentient, while other two Paśu and Pāśa are considered insentient Jaḍas. Paśu is not a sentient being but is eternal without guṇas, without actions and without lordship, and doesn't undergo change. However inside the body it shines like a light by its own brightness. It gets _yoga-siddhi_ in the body. When it receives _Śaktipāta_ through practise of _Prāṇāyāma_ etc., through supreme yoga, and through the teachings of a good Guru. he attains _samādhi_. Through that yoga he is able to see the supreme in his own body as a reflection of moon in water. He obtains good knowledge and never returns to the state of Paśu, _paśutva_. In this stage though he is in the midst of objects and sound etc. they do not affect him. When he attains complete liberation, he is dissolved totally in Śiva, like salt dissolved in water. He loses his individual identity and becomes equal to Śiva. As Śiva himself is both in _Sakala_ and _Niṣkala_ form, this liberation is also known as Identity, _sāyujyam_.

## Śiva-aikya-vāda

This school accepts appropriately what is said by _Śiva saṅrāntavādis_, but holds Śiva alone is the cause of the world. As the individual soul is also sentient the Pāśa alone is insentient in this system. The soul follows the _Pāśa dharma_, as it is totally bound by it. It enters the body by itself. In the presence of Śiva and with the help of āgama he acts by his own efforts, and enjoys all pleasures through intellect, _buddhi_ and other senses. When _Śaktinipāta_ is obtained through knowledge, practise, and understanding of the _tattvas_ (principles) he abandons residing in village houses. He acquires _ṣaḍaṅga yoga_, discards _Paśu-bhāva_ and goes after Śiva in exclusion. He sees Śiva in his conscience attains the abode of Śiva and meditates on _Pañcākṣara_. He reaches a stage, which is neither void nor non-void but Peace - śānti. He retires to an isolated place, abandons all bondages and obtains liberation.

## Śaiva Pakṣa

This school accepts the earlier system appropriately, namely that Pati, Paśu, and Pāśa are mutually related to each other. The soul is self-luminant and is of the nature of consciousness. He is shrouded by the beginningless impurities, enjoys pains and pleasures in his worldly life. When he attains _Śaktipāta_, Śiva himself assumes the role of Guru and initiates him and also teaches him how to get rid of mala, māyā etc., Attaining knowledge through that he loses the state of knower, known and knowledge. At that stage the soul and the Supreme are united inseperably. There is no question of enjoyment as there is no existence of individuality. When the body dies, he becomes one with Śiva. He stands above all paths. He is not _Sakala_ with parts, performs all actions but has no beginningless impurities.

Pāśupata System

## Guṇa-Saṅkrānta-vādin

The Pāśupatas, have ash (_bhasmam_) (_medhyam_), shoulder scarf, book. rag of cloth and waist band. These five are called Pāśupata-signs. Great men adore and observe this system. _Pratyakṣa_ and other instruments of cognition have been detailed earlier. Among them the _Pāśupata āgama_ is the best. The following sixteen texts enumerated in the _Dīptāgama_ constitute the Pāśupata system.

1\. Prājāpatya, 2. Prabuddha, 3. Kāśyapa, 4. Bhārgavõttara, 5. Vāsavam, 6. Vārunam, 7. Padmasamhita, 8. Pāramēśam, 9. Pāśupata, 10. Vaśiṣṭa, 11. Kalpa, 12. Praphullam, 13. Vāyavīyam, 14. Bārhaspatyam, 15. Varāha, 16. Sadagama

This System accepts the three entities Pati, Paśu, and Pāśa. The Paśus are considered omnipresent, but are bound by _māyā_ and _karma_, by cause and effect, that are generated by their known action. At some stage and cause they develop self-denial _Vairāgya_. Then they take Śaiva initiation _Śiva-dīkṣa_ as prescribed in the Pāśupata system from a learned Ācarya, and obtain liberation and becomes equal to Śiva, _śiva sama_. Orginally they were endowed with limited knowledge, but when liberated attain all knowing power. The One who obtained blemishless state and liberation attains equality with Śiva and _kaivalya_. All the qualities of Śiva, manifest in his soul, who is now considered a freed soul. Even if he does not act like Śiva he remains always in his own self. This system is called _Guṇa-Saṅkrānta_ branch of the Pāśupatas.

## Pravāha-Nityeśvaras

There is another school named _Pravāha-nityeśvaras_ that differs from the _Saṅkrānti_ School. They consider the relationship of soul with Siva as postulated by _Ekānmavāda_. They follow what is said in the Pāśupata system for the rest. The Soul becomes Śiva when liberated and he begins performing celestial actions. Śiva retires from his powers and does not act then. When the individual soul becomes pure all guṇas of Śiva manifest in him. So he understands Śiva's actions like creating the universe etc. and performs them himself. It is like a father seeing his son intelligent and able to manage the family affairs, retires from his supervisory power, and becomes a recluse so also Śiva retires after entrusting his powers to the liberated Soul. This school is called _Pravāha-nityēśvara_, Eternal Sivahood like a stream.

## Śrauta Pāśupata

Śrauta Pasupata system is also called Vaidika Pāśupata, which was taught by Śiva to Pārvatī in accordance with the Vedas. Propounded by Upamanyu, the Vaidika Pāśupata system is very extensive. The best exposition is found in _Vāyavīya Samhita_. Like all other Śaiva system this also holds three entities as Pati, Paśu, and Pāśa. Liberation is considered _Utpatti-Samavāda_ in this school.

Agamas are classified into two branches 1. _Śrauta_ (Vedic) and (2) _Aśrauta_ (non Vedic); the Vedic branches are the very essence of Vedas (_Veda-śāra_). The non Vedic branches are said to be independent (_Svatantra_). The independent works are ten and eighteen (constituting a total of 28 in number) beginning from _Kāmikāgama_ and so on, which are called the Siddhānta.

The Śrauta branch is a vast school with several hundred branches. The one that speaks of the supreme Pāśupata observance and knowledge is called _Śrautam_ (_Vaidikam_) and this is detailed in _Atharva-śiras_ (upaniṣad) which holds that the supreme mode is in four parts as _caryā_, _kriya_, _yoga_ and _Jñāna_. Following this four fold path, the Pāśupata devotee will behold Śiva. Therefore in Pāśupata yoga System is considered the best observance. Śrīkaṇṭa Śiva taught this system to Pārvatī. Among all the paths prescribed in Śaiva system, the singularly best practise is said to be the _Srauta Pāśupata_ system. Śiva who himself manifests in the cycle of yugas as Yogācārya, expounds this system. Four Supreme Riṣis, Ruru, Dadhīci, Agastya and Upamanyu of great fame and called Pāśupatas, abridged this system and propagated the practise. Out of these four came hundreds of thousands of gurus in their lineages.

The Vaidika Pāśupata system, accepts three entities (Pati, Paśu, Pāśa), realized through _pratyakṣa_, and other instruments of cognition _pramāṇas_ based on _Vedantavākyas_, which are interpreted through _Viśiṣṭādvaita_ tenets. They also briefly accept the principles relating to Pati, Paśu, and Pāśa, detailed in Agamas like _Kāmika_.

The instruments of cognition like _pratyakṣa_, _anumāna_, _upamāna_, _āgama_ and _artāpatti_, are accepted as valid _pramāṇas_ in _Śrauta Pāśupata_ system like the Vaidika śaivam. Paśu is considered intelligent (_ajaḍa_) but Pāśa is non-intelligent while Pati is the controller (_niyanta_). Eminent teachers of this system describe these as immortal, mortal and immortal-mortal. Paśu, the individual (soul) is immortal (_akṣara_), Pāśa is mortal (_kṣara_) and Pati is immortal-mortal (_kṣara-akṣara_). These are also identified with Prakṛti (_kṣara_), Puruṣa (_akṣara_) and Parameśvara is _kṣara-akṣara_. Prakṛti is māyā-Puruṣa enveloped with Māyā is related to _māyā_ through _mala_ (impurity and action (_karma_)). Māyā is also called the power of Maheśvara (_Maheśvari-Śakti_); the individual consciousness is enveloped by _māyā_, eradication of impurity is purification. (Puruṣa is identified with the form of consciousness, (_cidrūpa_). Purity of consciousness is called Śivahood.

Though the individual soul is omni-present, it is enveloped by _mala_. Enjoyment of pleasures through action is the cause of this envelopment. When the _mala_ is removed the soul returns to its original state. Five categories are recognised in this regard; they are _kalā_, _kāla_ (time), _vidyā_ (knowledge), _rāga_ (passion), and _niyati_ (?) these are attached to Puruṣa, meritorious and sinful acts result in happiness or sorrow; one takes recourse to _Jñāna_ to enjoy the beginningless results till it is ended: enjoyment is for the termination of _Karma_; enjoyment is unmanifest, the body is the vehicle for experiencing enjoyment through organs of actions (_karmendriyas_) and organs of perceptions (_jñānendriyas_), the former being external and the later internal organs.

The impurities are wiped out by deep feelings (_bhava_) when grace dawns and with it the impurity of the soul is gone; he becomes one like Śiva (_Śiva-sama_). Vidyā fastens actions and sight as a string together; _kalā_, induces passions: _kālā_ breaks, and _niyati_-induces. Unmanifest is the cause though it is overwhelmed by the three guṇas; those who are shrouded by pleasure or pain are divided into three catagries on the basis of three guṇas, _sattva_, _rājas_, and _tāmas_, which arise due to natural causes. Pleasures and their causes are called _sāttvikas_, the opposite namely pain and causes of pain are called _tamasa_ guṇas. That which produces both is called _rājasa_. _Sattva_ is called the ascending path; _tamasa_ is called the descending path; while _rājasa_ is called the middle path. _Tanmātras_ are the five subtle elements, (sound, taste, sight, smell. touch); Earth, Water, fire, air and ether are five basic elements; organs of knowledge are five, skin, mouth, eye, ear, and nose, organs of action are five, hands, legs, anus, generative organ; mind (mana), _buddhi_ critical faculty and egoism _ahamkāra_ and three guṇas. By the combination of all these, that which is unmanifest is made manifest. When these _tattvas_ are in causal state they are unmanifest but when in manifested stage, they are the effects. The Soul called _antaryāmi_, which pervades everything, is different from intellect, senses, and body. Even eyes cannot see it. It can be perceived only by an illumined mind. The soul is a man, a woman or an inert being. The soul, which has no body, resides in a body that is mobile. One becomes an enjoyer of pleasure or suffers pains, due to his own action. The Soul sees the body but the body the soul. All beings from God Brahmā to plants and vegetation are called Paśus. One who is bound by Pāśa (bondage) and enjoys pleasures or suffers pain is called a Paśu. He has all instruments of actions like Īśvara, but because of ignorance he acts like an animal. By the inducement of God he can go to heaven.

Pati is different from Paśu and Pāśa. (The text goes to enumerate the nature of Pati in a long passage citing extensively Vēdic and Upaniṣadic passages). Pati is an endless beauty and possessed of endless guṇas. He supports the whole manifest and unmanifest beings of this universe. There is nothing that needs to be known beyond him. He is different from the souls of even Mahātmas. One who is ever engaged in truth and penance beholds him; he is one Lord who controls all these by himself through his various powers (Śaktis). He is the one Rudra and there is no other. Having created this universe he protects this and dissolves it. He eyes everything (_Viśvatas cakṣuḥ_). He has faces everywhere; similarly he has hands every where and legs every where (_viśvato bāhuḥ viśvataḥ pādam ucyate_). He creates heaven and earth; he is lord of all gods and creator of all gods. He creates first Hiraṇya-garbha among gods. So Rudra is greater than all the universe and is called Mahaṛṣi. He is beyond darkness and is of the colour of the sun (_adityavarṇan tamasaḥ parastād_). He is Subtler than the subtlest and greater than the greatest. He resides in the cave of human soul. One should know _māyā_ as the Prakṛti, and _māyin_ in is Maheśvara. Having known him. One attains Supreme peace (_param śāntim_). Having known this lord of the universe one is relieved of bondage of death. He resides in ones heart and having known him, one attains immortality. There is Śiva alone who is the embodiment of most ancient knowledge. There is no image of him (_na tasya pratimā asti_). There is no name for him; he is immortal; he is unborn. Those who are afraid of birth and long for liberation adore the Southern face Rudra.

This Viśvarūpa, Abhava (unmanifest) becomes Bhava (manifest) Prajāpati. He is Deva-deva, and lord of the universe. He remains in Our consciousness and we worship him (_Sva-cittastham upasmahe_). Those mahātmas (great men) who perceive him in their own self, they alone enjoy supreme happiness. This supreme lord created Brahma and taught him Vedas. Those who know this through their bright knowledge take recourse to Śiva. So the Mahaṛṣis through their penance and the grace of Lord reach the end of suffering (_duḥkānta_) that is the teaching of Vedānta).

The Supreme lord of all the above is one. Three classification are attempted on the basis of place (_sthāna_), action (_kārya_) and delegated power (_adhikāra_). Upto the world tattivas (_Jagat_) is ruled by Sata Rudras; the _antarikṣa_ is ruled by Indira and other devas upto the end of Mahāmāyās. The Śaktis like Vāmas and also Bhuvanadhipas who rule these are the emanations in space.

There is nothing that needs to be done by the Supreme Śiva (_kārya_). He acts only for bestowing grace on the World. Various gods manifest to execute these graces on men through Various forms. The Various forms of gods are visualized for the sake of worship. (_pūjartham mūrtyātmā parikalpanam_). That which is offered to these different images reaches Śiva himself. Those who offer anything to liṅga or ācārya worship Śiva. It is for these reason we worship different images. Śiva bestows grace through those manifestations. Sadaśiva and other forms manifest only to bestow grace on earth. Rāga and other blemishes are present even in manifested images and yet they remain with them but do not affect Śiva. As Śiva is pure and is the soul (_ātmā_) of the individual, the duality is not accepted. Therefore this school considers that Śiva's manifestation in individual soul leads to inseparable unity (_advaita_) as taught by _Vedanta vākya_. So individual is said to be equal to Śiva-(_Śiva-sāmya_).

Liberation is possible only for those who are practioners of this system, who have received _Śaktinipāta_ due to the equalizing influence of the impurities of action, karma malas following _caryā_, _kriyā_ and _yoga_. Only those who observe _Śaiva kriyā_, _caryā_, and _yoga_ and are purified by _Śaktipāta_ become eligible for _Nirvāṇa dīkṣa_ (ultimate initiation) and obtain liberation. The disciple is qualified to receive initiation according to the _Śaktipāta_, for only such initiation purifies the candidate. So without _Śivācāra_ and _Śivajñāna_ there is no liberation. So it is incumbant on the guru to examine the disciple for his knowledge and action. Guru's examination appropriately is essential for knowing the _Śaktipāta_ for it is the instrument of bestowing knowledge of bliss. For _ānanda_ (bliss) and yoga are the functions of inner consciousness. This attainment gives the practitioner a shiver in his body, limbs, horripulation, sound and eyes. The Guru should examine the disciple for such changes in body before initiating him. The _dīkṣa_ is so called because it gives (_dīyate_) special knowledge and eradicates the bondage (_kṣīyate pāśa bandhanam_).

There are three kinds of _dīkṣa_ (initiations) mentioned in Āgamas namely _Śāmbhava-dīkṣha_, _Sakti dīkṣa_ and _Mantra dīkṣa_. It should be understood that _dīkṣa_ is taught by Śiva himself. By the guru's sight, touch or speech, the disciple gets awakening and such an instantaneous initiation is called _Śāmbavidīkṣa_. This is again divided into two categories as _tīvra_, and _tīvratarā_. The one that bestows immediate The one that bestows immediate release is called _Tīvratarā_ while the other is continued upto the end of the practitioner's life. The Śakti initiation is one in which the guru enters the body of the disciple through yogic means and bestows knowledge. The _Mantra dīkṣa_ is the one in which sacrificial altar is prepared, homa is offered and the initiation given lightly or more intensely suited to his capacity. A non-śaivite initiate should not practise Śaiva discipline, _Śiva pūja_ or meditate on Śiva, as he will not obtain Śivahood. So one has to transform ones body into a Śaivite body, abandon the feeling that he is bound by Pāśa (fettered), consider that "I am Śiva" (_Śivoham_) and perform _Śaiva-kriyās_ actions.

There are five _yajñas_ ritual practices, namely _karma-yajña_ (action as ritual), _tapoyajña_ (penance as ritual), _japa-yajña_ (repetition of Śiva's names as ritual). _dhyana-yajña_ (meditation as ritual) and _jñana-yajña_ (knowing as a ritual). There are practitioners of one or the other of these _yajñas_ (rituals), but the ones mentioned in the above order are superior to the earlier ones. One who performs _Jñāna Yajña_ will obtain _Śiva-Sāyujya_ (unity with Śiva) very quickly out of this five _yajñas_, practicing meditation (_dhyāna yajña_) one attains _Jñāna yajña_ and crosses the ocean of worldly life _samsāra_. One who leaving aside Śiva who resides in his own self, worships him in outside images is like one having a fruit in his hand tries to obtain it by licking his elbow. _Śivajñāna_ is obtained by meditation and so one should practise meditation on Śiva. One should meditate either on the top of the head, forehead, between the eyebrows; tip of the nose, neck, heart, navel or on the permanent seat, worshipping Śiva and Pārvati devī. It is called _aṣṭāṅga yoga_ and by this, Śaiva awareness dawns and through it _Śiva Jñāna_. Śiva is pleased with such a practioner so that he is able to perceive Śiva. The liberated by this process becomes equal to Śiva. Whether in the ultimate stage, there is unity with Śiva or equality with Śiva is the question that is posed. If one attains unity with Śiva in the _Viśiṣṭādvaita_ mode, he again returns to action as in the case of _ekātmavāda_ and gets into _samsāra_. So this system does not accept the concept of unity, but holds _Śiva-sāmyatā_ i.e. equality with Śiva as the ultimate end. This system does not accept _ekātma-vāda_ or _saṅkrānta-vāda_ and accepts only equality with Śiva for the soul.

## End notes

1. Alexis Sanderson _History through textual criticism_ in _His sources Et le Temps_ ed. Francais Grimal, Institute Francais de Pondichery, Pondichery, PP 1-47, 2001.

2. Jv. p. 322. _Ratnatrayādau gurubhih eva hi; gurubhih api tathaiva pratīpādyate_. p. 321, _sūtras_ 47 and 87.

3. Goodall Ibid, Introduction.

4. Jv. p.184 5. Jv. p.3 6. Jv. p.2 7. Jv. p.3 8. Jv. p.3 9. Jv. p.3 10. Jv. p.3 11. Jv. p.321-323 Verses of _Śivayoga ratna_ cited are 171, 146, 21

12. Jv.p8 _vāmam hi sāmbhavam śāstram dakṣiṇam bhairavātmakam miśram yāmalam ityuktam sapta matṛ pradhānakam_

13. Jv.p.8 _śaivam pāśupatam vāmam bhairavam tu mahāvratam kālāmukham iti khyātam antaḥ samaya ṣaḍkakam_

14. Jv. p.21 15. Jv. p.21

* * *


