+++
title = "Antyeṣṭi shrAddham"
+++

_Mahāmahopādhyāya_ Dr. R.Sathyanārāyaṇa

(Dīkṣānāma: Śrī Guru Satyānanda Nātha Mahārājajī)

**Śrīvidyā Guru Antyeṣṭi Vidhi**

(The final rites for a Śrīvidyā Guru or an upāsaka)

<details><summary>Translator's note</summary>

My _guru_, Śrī Sathyanārāyaṇa wrote this chapter in his magnum opus book trilogy series called ‘_Śrīvidyā ṣoḍaśikā_’ under the publication series ‘_Citkalā_’, when (along with the _gurukula_ which he founded) his _guru Śrī _Puṇḍarīkākṣānanda Nātha appeared as a spiritual vision from the _Yajña kuṇḍa_ (a place for sacrifice, the place where the _yajña_ is performed) with a special behest: that Sathyanārāyaṇa had to perform the proper _antyeṣṭi_ to enable the _guru_ to attain the _divyadeha_(ultimate state of existence). In order to fulfill this, Sathyanārāyaṇa had to first ascertain its modalities and hence worked perennially amongst the _Śrīvidyā_ texts. This article is the result of that effort. He took care to not to extensively include the mention of intimate and deeply guarded ritualistic details, secrets and verses, in order to avoid them from an exposure to vulgar curiosity. However, his original _kannaḍa_ (local vernacular of Karnāṭaka, a state in India) article includes an extensive bibliography and references with which those things can also be known. It can be provided to learned readers on request.

I have translated this article with as much due diligence as possible to not to deviate from its original intent and content. Any translation, for that matter, is indeed a literary interpretation of the original to a measurable extant. 

_Traduttore, traditore_. The grammar, individual’s language usage styles, limitations of vocabulary, terminology akin to that discipline for which the original was written etc might not accommodate in the vocabulary of translated language. Thus, the original article’s specific words and terms that contain language specific terminologies are to be given ad verbatim in the translated text too. In order to make the reading more meaningful and truthful, the specific terminologies (_paribhāṣa_) are explained to their nearest context just next to them with in-brackets. The original article contains many such specific _Tantra_ terminologies (_paribhāṣā_). In each of these paragraphs, many are very explicit in their meaning and content but some require basic geo-specific and subject-specific information regarding its tradition and rituals pertaining to tantric tenets. It is my intention to create a separate addendum for this article to explain them in some measurable detail. Such terms and phrases are marked with a ‘symbol with number’ for their correlation in the addendum. However, their inclusion in the article while in those phrases or terms would deviate the continuity in the attentive focus of the readers, is what I have felt and noticed from my many interactions with my readers. Hence, I request that the addendum be also carefully read and referred to by the learned readers of this article to make a holistic meaning and use (if any) of this article.

 _R. S. Nandakumar_

</details>


The word _antyeṣṭi_ is used as a Vedic or Tantric terminology to describe a gamut of actions comprising of the final rites of a person after his death. These rites are done to the cadaver of such a person. Its foremost and key action is done in either of these two modes: to bury or burn in Bhārata amongst the Hindūs (In India, the other religious beliefs accommodate the offer of the body to be consumed by birds, animals or fish (as is done in places like Vāraṇāsi). The ways of the Hindūs are based on the tenet prescription that what came from the _pañcabhūtās_ should be rendered back to it, and the other cultures offer it as food for other bodies (and thus the parts that sustained a life force is rendered back to other living bodies as food thus fulfilling the purpose and attainment of the body while living). Each and every culture of our world has devised its own type/s of such eschatology practice descriptions codified as a text and in Bhārata it is given a _saṃskṛta_ term ‘_pretaśāstra_’. Amongst Hindūs, the burying of the body is called as _khanana_ and burning is called as _dahana_. Before all these, an iṣṭi (a small homa offering) is performed. And using the fire that has kindled in this _homa_, the body is placed on a pyre and the wood is set to fire. This entails various _mantras_ and actions that bespeaks the offering of the cadaver to release the _jīva_ (life) that had made the body as its abode to reach the _Devaloka_ or the _Pitr̥loka_ (the realms of the _pitr̥_). This begins the ‘_antyeṣṭi_’ mode and thus the entire gamut of actions that follow it takes on this term too. The word _antyeṣṭi_ is a composite of two words: _antya_ (the final) and _iṣṭi_ (offering). Great seers like Bodhāyana and the other two _ācāryas_ who have set the _sūtras_ (prescriptive doctrines) have said that _antyeṣṭi_ is primarily done for _Brāhmaṇa varga_ (the _brāhmaṇa_ clan) and for other three vargas (_kṣatriya_,_ vaiśya _and_ śūdra _clans) it is done in their _kulakrama_ (the basic _antyeṣṭi vidhi _adopted to their kin group’s vogue practices). For _saṃnyāsin_, there is a separate and different type that is prescribed in the _sūtras_. (I have covered all these in another work of mine in _kannaḍa_ language published some time ago).

In _Śrīvidyā Tantra_ too, extensive _antyeṣṭi vidhi_ is prescribed for its _dīkṣitās_ (persons initiated by their guru into its _sādhanā_) and also for those a special initiation ritual called _pūrṇābhiṣekha_ is done. Amongst the _Śrīvidyā_ texts that I have browsed, this vidhi is delineated in _Trikūṭārahasya_ and _Paraśurāma Kalpasūtra _with some narrative and prescriptive differences amongst them.

Based on these two texts, I narrate henceforth the _vidhi_ of _antyeṣṭi_ for _Śrīvidyā dīkṣitas _and_ Śrividyā abhiṣikta sādhakas_.

In _Śaivāgama_, the _dīkṣita_,_ siddha _and_ Śrīvidyā sādhakas_ are further respectively classified within them as _uttama_ (superior), _madhyama_ (the average) and the _adhama_ (lowly). Interestingly, this classification is done based also on the modality in which the _prāṇa_ (life-force) leaves the body of the _upāsaka_. In _uttama varga _(superior_ sādhaka _group), who would have already attained a very high level of _ātmadarśana_ (self-emancipation), a ritualistic _antyeṣṭi_ is not necessary. Thus, in contrast, for the _adhamas_ who are filled with _pāpa sañcaya _(sinful, collected to its threshold etc.) an _antyeṣṭi_ is not prescribed. _Ūttama_’s_ prāṇa _leaves the body through the _brahmarandhra_ (the tip of the scalp). For the _madhyama_, it leaves through the eyes, nose etc. and for the _adhama_ it leaves through the genitals or the anus. The texts further goes on to say that for all those whose _prāṇa_ leaves via the nose, genitals or the anus, the _jīva_ attains the hell or the intermediary _piśācā_ abode. When the _jīva_ exits the body through mouth, he reaches, _daitya loka_ (here _daitya_ also means a voluptuous space), if it exits through ears, the _jīva_ attains the _Pitr̥loka_ (the abode of _pitr̥s_, the ancestor’s holy place), and if it exits through the _brahmarandhra_ (_brahma_ = the superior/ultimate, _randhra_= passage) the _jīva_ attains _mokṣa_ or the _Śivasthāna_ (ultimate propitious state).

_Śrī guru_, the preceptor of the _Śrīvidyā kula_ (_kula_ = clan, family, group etc.), or his _dīkṣita śiṣya_ (properly initiated disciple), when expires, his _antyeṣṭi_ need to be done by first noticing how the _prāṇa_ exits the body. First, the day of death (according to the _pañcāṅga_, the traditional almanac) is ascertained. The minor details of the _antyeṣṭi_ are fine-tuned based on this factor. The cadaver of the _guru_ or the _sādhaka_ is placed in _yogāsana_ posture on _darbha_ (or _kuśa_ grass) woven into a mat. The _kartr̥_ (one who takes on the responsibility of doing the _antyeṣṭi_) propitiates Bhairava and Yoginī _devatās_ by prescribed _arcana_ (specialized ritualistic) _vidhi_. Then, _puśpāñjali_ (flowers and garlands) is offered to the _Guru/sādhaka_ with this _prārthanā_ (prayer): O superior spirit (Deva), Mahādeva, most compassionate, bestowed of benefice (_śaṃkara_), perennially blissful (_nityānanda_), n_irādhāra nirākula_ (one who has exalted to a ‘no adherence to mundane’ state of existence), and _nirañjana_ (blissful), all that is beneficial happens at your behest. Yet, o Śiva, _sarvajñya_ (knower of all), Parameśvara (ultimate being), kindly condone me should I have done anything wrong in the past. Thou my _guru_ and imperishable, I am your devotee and disciple and thus empower me to accomplish further _vidhi_. I shall use only my true virtues, monies and such worldly tools to do your _antyeṣṭi_ using the _divyāgama_ (meaning the most propitious of all _Agamas_, the _śāktāgama_ texts and practices). Thus saying the _kartr̥_ then prostrates in multifold (again and again) before the _Guru/sādhaka_ in the _darbhāsana_ posture.

He then keeps the _gurupāduka_ (specially made out sandals of the _guru_ either in wood or metal and which is etched with special symbols and _mantra_ verses) on the _gurupīṭha_ (the seat used by the _Guru_ or the _sādhaka_ during their _sādhanā_) to do a special _pūjā_ ritual, if such is not possible at that time, then he take a special vow to do it in the proceeding corresponding day. The _kartr̥_ then puts together all the worldly remains of the diseased and makes four parts. Out of this, two parts of these goes to the son (or the next in line incumbent), one part goes as _dāna_ to a pious person of the same _gotra_ (roughly translated as ‘tribesman’), and the remaining one part is fully utilized as expenditure incurred for the _antyeṣṭi_ rituals. Such rituals would usually start from the third, fifth or the seventh day reckoned from the day of death (as per the traditional almanac).

The texts (_Kalpasūtras_) also provide very interesting insights of the event. If the _Guru_ or the _sādhaka_ is in his ultimate throes of death, but not expired yet, a special ritualistic _Śricakra pūjā_ is to be done. The _kartr̥_ then goes to the about to expire _sādhaka_ and utters the _gurupādukā mantra_,_ caraṇatraya mantra_,_ vidyādvaya mantra_, various _sampradāya mantra _that the _upāsaka_ practiced in his life (according to his _kula_ practices), general _kaula_ practices and their _mantras_ (rituals and verses that are common to the area), _kulakramānugata mantra_ (traditionally handed over secretive _mantras_),_ kādi-hādi-sādi mārga mantras_ (the trifold layers or levels in a _Śrīvidyā_ practice) are then essentially uttered (_japa vidhāna_). While all these are happening before the _Guru_ or the _sādhaka_ in their death bed/seat, their _citta_, the inner essential core being gets focused. And then the _kartr̥_ has to do a very essential ritual: he recites the _purāṇa mantra _(in the _Śivapurāna_ yore, it is said that the great king Bhūtirāja obtained _mantras_ from Śiva to attain his _mokṣa_),_ bramavidyā mantra_ (only the _vākya_ verses) are recited by inserting the _Oṃ praṇava_ in-between the _vākya_ of the verses. He then ritualistically organizes the essential items used for the _antyeṣṭi_ rituals using the _mantras_ as prescribed in the _Kalpasūtrā_. The _kartr̥_ now recites the ultimate _haṃsa mantra _(_Oṃ haṃsaḥ_) in the ears of the dying (or the dead) _Guru_ or the _sādhaka_. By this, the _jīva_, now rises above the mortal body and reaches the Parabrahman state, the ultimate _mokṣa_.

Now, the Brahmavidya is narrated thus. This is a bestowed of absolute and full benefit. Śiva himself has taught this to the _Śrīvidyā dīkṣitas_ for their final emancipation. The lord has ordained that the very recitation of this will surely bestow the _mokṣa_ (_nirañjanatva_) to all living beings. Even a casual hearing of these _mantras_ would relieve the _jīva_ of all _moha_ (stupefaction) and _māyā_ (illusionary world/knowledge/creatrix) and ushers the _sādhaka_ into the real knowledge. This is further segmented into _naromāya_,_ vedamāya_,_ vedakalā_, one’s own _mātr̥kāyoni_ (the secretive _mātr̥kā_ vowel given by the _Guru_ during the _dīkṣā_) are then used before and after each line of the verses of this _mantra_:

- _Oṃ hrīm hasakḥphreṃ aṃ hasakṣamalavarayūṃ: this is the niṣkalābrahmavidyā_. This _mantra_ is to be uttered before and after each of the following lines.
- _Paramapadātmamihāgataḥ sanātanaḥ jahi hi dehāntaram pādāñguṣṭhādi vibho nibandhanam jhihyugram hasakṣamalavarayūm aṃ hasakhphrem_ (leave O _vibho_ (omnipotent one) _sādhaka_, the ultimate goal and being-fullness is just a step away from you now. This is the very primordial state, leave your stance from your tip of the toe to the crown of the head to relinquish this mortal (useless) body to attain the _hamsaḥ_ state)
- _Gulphānte jānugatam jatrustham bandhanam tathā meḍhre jahihi paramagryam madhyam nibandhanāt smuttiśṭha sahayāgryāñca vibho sadāśiva sargeṣu purosi jīvākhyāḥ ravi moha vanhi sandhyadamañḍalā madhya tiśṭhaḥ śakti mahā setukāraṇam mahārtha kāmalobha viniviṣṭaḥ prabodha māyādhidevatādehe_ (O Lord Sadāśiva ! I have now bound the cadaver from its _gulpha_ (chins) to _jānu_ (the knees), from its _meḍhr_ (bound the legs in a crisscross) and then I have made the cadaver to sit upright (_samuttiśṭha_). O _vibho_, you now do the kindness of elevating this soul by integrating the _śakti_ which resides in the navel region to rise towards the head (Sadāśiva _sarga_), thus relieving this soul (_prabodha_) from the _māyādeha_ (the illusory body) with is filled with (_viniveṣaḥ_)_ kāmalobha _(the five sins that bid the pure soul to the mortal body). (this _mantra_ and its concept further dwell on the _āyurveda_ tenet that at the time of death, the _tridośa_ merges completely to nullify the _prāṇa_. Here the prayer is to elevate the Śakti towards the Śiva which in turn makes the _prāṇa_ leave the mortal remains without any deformity)
- _Ājñānātvam manu ca pracodito kr̥ṣṇa deva deva dehaja tālu sāhvayāttam hoyaudumbara ghaṭita mahādvāram prāpya prayāhi deham hoham hoham vāgvāma deva pade (having thus imbibed the knowledge from tradition_ (O, lord Kr̥ṣṇa, elevate this spirit to the level of divinity, through this great passage opened up through this _audumbara_ wood construct, let this spirit grasp and reach the higher reaches, _Ho hum Ho hum_, reach the Brahman, the vastness)
- _Granthāñścara paramātman śāntamahītālu randhramāsādyā utkramadeha maheśvara niranjana śivapaprayāhdayamśu_ (by the grace of Śiva the all compassionate, may this spirit rise above and move on from this mortal remains to attain everlasting state of Paramātman. Note: this and other _mantras_ given here attain the _siddhi_ (power) because of insertion of specific sounds and terms born out of such sound conglomerations)
- _Akramya dharmamārgam prāṇāpānau samāhr̥tya dharmau tyaktvā nārāyaṇa yāhi śāntā tam_ (get put on in this righteous path, let the five life winds (_pañcaprāṇa vāyu_) merge together, let the body and spirit ordination come to an end, attain the state of Nārāyaṇa with peace and success)
- _He brahman he viṣṇo he rudra śiva śrīvāsudevastvamagniṣṭhoma sanātana mr̥tpiṇḍam jahihi mahākāśa_ (O Brahmā, o Viśṇu, o Rudraśiva, the divine light that emanates because of the _Śrī_ Vāsudeva is now attainable for you, O departing _jīva_. Because of this divine line verse that is equivalent to the most powerful _agniṣṭhoma_ which is primordial, you shall thus happily leave this _mr̥tpiṇḍa_ (the cadaver) to attain the _mahākāśa_, the vastness.
- _Aṅguṣṭhamātram amalam sādhāraṇam jahihi he mahāsūkṣma _(O, you are now in the penultimate pin-pointed state of existence which is the very general causality of this world, may this verse urge you further on to leave this (blissful) state too)
- _Puruṣatvam prakr̥timayo baddhohaṅkāratantunā baddho nityodita paramātmastyaja sarāgam adhvānām_ (O, now leave even the male (_puruṣa_) and female (_prakr̥ti_) attributes which is binding to the state of _ahaṃkāra_ (I am stature), which in turn returns to its lower existential states, rise and rise towards the omnipotent and omnipresent Paramātma stature which is all ensconcing and all encompassing)
- _Tadidam guṇamutsr̥ja tvam ṣāṭakāśikam deham_ (O, (because of the _saṃskāra_), the _deha_ still retains the six-fold pollutant (six-fold _pāpa_= sin), now and now and now, you shall relieve all these _guṇās_.
- _R̥ddhimantra śarīratvamehi dehāntram_ (because of these purifying verses, you shall hear them and relinquish all your bodily states after you first leave this mortal cadaver)
- _Tyaja deham bhūtamayam pragr̥hyatām śāśvatam mahādeha_ (O, you shall now realize that this body is only the constituent of the five elements (_bhūtamayam-pañcabhūtamayam_). Rise now above this to attain the omnipresent omnipotent divine body)
- _Iti_ (thus are these elevating and emancipating lines)
- _Brahmavidyā jñānī svayamevāsūnniyasya prajapettadā anyatha śr̥uṇuyādvāpi tadaikāgramanāḥ bhavet _(those who meditate continuously upon these _Brahmavidyā_ verses help to attain the oneness with the ultimate, barring which, if one even hears this attains the essential focused mind to pave the way towards the divinity. Thus, one who practices this _nirvāṇavidyā_ attains the _nirvāṇāpada_)

The _kartr̥_ who takes on the responsibility of doing the _antyeṣṭi_ should ritualistically obtain the _Śivāmśa_ (and in Śiva_ bhāva_ = unbridled but devoted mind) should do the _snāna_ (take the holy bath), should wear the ritualistic cloth and such ornamentation, finish his daily rituals like _nityāhnīka_. He then sits before the cadaver with settled mind and peace. He performs the ritualistic _aṅganyāsa_ (anointment of the various parts of his body with _mantras_). He installs the _śrī kalaśa_ which is filled with holy water. He cleanses the _pinḍa_ (the cadaver) of the _guru_ or _sādhaka_ with the _mantra_ given by his (_Śrīvidyā_)_ Guru _and the _ratnapañcaka_ (_pañcabhūta mantra_) or _dīpani mantra_. And then, he recites the_ jvālāmālinī mantra_,_ vyoma mantra_ in its sixth tenor, the (_Śrīvidyā_)_ astra mantra_ (armament _mantra_) and _māyābīja_ (a secretive vowel given by the _Guru_ during _dīkṣākrama_).

This is the _dīpani mantra_: 

_Oṃ hrīṃ hasakhphreṃ aṃ hasakṣamalavarayūṃ aiṃ dīpani jvālāmālini hūṃ haṃsaḥ phaṭ hrīṃ hasakphreṃmalavaraūṃ aṃ hasakhphreṃ hrīṃ Oṃ_.

Thus reciting this _mantra_, holding once to show the _śakticālana_ (_mudrā_), the cadaver is washed again (with ghee or water) and then as per the vedic and colloquial practice, the departed _prāṇa_ is again ritualistically consecrated into the cadaver through eyes, and other _navarandhra_ (the nine outlet-inlets of the body). The _kartr̥_ then seeks the blessings of the _Guru_ by suitable verses and prayer to recite and use _mantras_ that empower the attraction of _ākāśa_,_ agnibīja_, bestower of _mokṣa_ (all these have _bindu_ at the end, for without the _bindu_, the _mantras_ are powerless). These are again recited with vedic _mantras_ that start from _cakṣu_ at its end along with the _pretanāma_, the various ascribed nomenclature of the _preta_ (the departed spirit).

Using this _mantra_, again, _proṃ mokṣe devasurādi pade deva devānāmāvāhayāmi_, and joining this with the five _Śrīvidyā praṇava_ (there are five equivalents to the vedic _Oṃ_ in _Tantra_), the _preta_ is invited into the cadaver again for further rituals. _preta sarvādibhyo nirākulam_,_ amuṣyotpādi _etc._ mantras _are now used to re-invite the _prāṇa vāyu_ (life breath), to do _aṅgasaṃkalpa_ (to do _bhāvana_ of the various limbs of the mortal remains) and this _mantra_ is used in conjunction with six _bījas_ starting from _hrāṃ_. Now a raw cotton thread is wound around the remains and the _prānapratiṣṭha_ (reinstallation of the _prāṇa_) is performed. From then on, the vedic rituals take over to do the _deha saṃskāra_ (the ritualistic embalming of the remains). Thus the entire remains now become _astirūpa vardhinī_ body (the skeleton of the mortal remains now acquires the name _vardhinī_). This is propitiated with _abhiṣeka_ with the holy water from the _kalaśa_.

The next process involves the anointment of the mortal remains with _bhasma_, the holy ash while praying for the _parameṣṭhiguru_ or _brahman_. The _kuśa_ grass is spread on the ground and the corpse is places with its head towards the South. It is decorated with various flowers and jewels too. A new cloth is wound around its neck (_tad galepyaiḥ_). Entire body is now covered with _nyāsa_ ritual wherein the _Guru/sādhaka_’s primary _mūlamantra upāsana nyāsa mantras_ and _bījamantras_ are used. The _gurupāduka_ is now placed on the right side of the body on the _darbha_ (_kuśa_) bed. Its _pūjā_ and _udvāsana_ are done. A _vimāna_ for the mortal remains (_śavavāhana_ = a raw palanquin) is now created according to the limb configurations of the body. The body is now kept on this _vimāna_ to be taken for a procession in the area en-route to the burial ground wherein instruments like _śaṅkha_ (conch) and _bherī_ (big diameter-skin) drums are played.

In the burning grounds a plain area is now selected and such a place is cleaned and kept dry. On this, _akṣata_ (holy rice), _aral̥u_ (puffed rice), _til_ seeds are strewn. On this ground, a _nityāgni_ (everyday ritualistic fire) is lit up. A _paristaraṇa_ (bundles of _kuśa_ long grass is kept around the making a square) is done in an anti-clock wise and on this the vessels for the rituals are placed. Towards the south, a _praṇītā_ vessel is kept invoking Viṣṇu and this is decorated with flowers and _akṣata_ rice. This vessel is then covered with _darbha_ grass and taken to the south-east corner of the _paristaraṇa_. In the southern part of the _paristaraṇa_, a Bhairava _maṇḍala_ is drawn and its _pūjā_ is performed. In one of its ends, an _agnimukha_, featuring the tongue of agni fire, is drawn. A _caru_ consisting of til seeds and rice is now mixed in an adequate quantity. _Agni_ is now fired up again in the _nityāgni_ portion and this _caru_, along with cow’s ghee is used while chanting _mr̥tyunjaya mantra_ along with five _mantras_ taken from ‘_sadyojātādi rudra nyāsa_’, a _homa_ is performed before the corpse. In-between these, the _Śrīvidyā mūlamantra _(the_ mantra _of_ upāsana/upāsaka_) is chanted seven times in a _viloma krama _(reverse order). This is the _viloma krama homa _which is indeed specific for this most important ritual. These _mantras_ in _viloma_ is again used to do _nyāsa_ on the remains of the _guru/sādhaka/upāsaka_ to redirect the _jīva_ to become one with _puryaṣṭaka_ (Sūrya the sun, Candra the moon, _pañcabhūta,_ the five elements and _cetana/puruṣa_ the spirit).

_Aiṃ_ is the _vāgbhava bīja_. This is used as an end adjunct to the _mūlamantra_ practiced by the departed and a _homa_ is done. If this order is clockwise then it is for the _gṛhastha_ and if in anticlockwise, then it is for the _saṃnyāsin_. But then, the _jīva_ is still in its _sūkṣmatatva_ (subtle body). For this, special ritualistic _mantras_ that involve this _tatva_ are used in _viloma_ rounds to garner all that now remains of the _jīva_ to reunite it with _ātman_. But then, even now, the subtle body is believed to be in an anxious state of existence. For this, another homa using the _puṇya pāpa bhaya bhakṣiṇī_ variety is employed to ward off all impediments to attain the final emancipation.

This variety includes the following _mantras_ and rituals: _khaṭakasakharayūṃ phuṃ phaṭ | śiśokhañga puṇyapāpamāsā nāsayāmi svāhā | _using this _sthala krama homa_ is performed which enables the subtle body to attain _ātman_. The various rituals in this method progressively involve the merging of the delicate _jīva_ with its higher but powerful pinpointed existential states. In its penultimate practice, the _jīva_ now acquires the state of _bindu_ point which empowers it to get rid of all worldly pollutants and weaknesses. The finale called the _pūrṇāhuti_ is done to empower the spirit to attain the _paramapada mokṣa_. Thus, the _guru, upāsaka/sādhaka_ now attains the purest form of bliss called _Śivaśaktyātmaka śuddha tattva_. Thus the vicious cycle of birth-death-rebirth becomes null and void.

Now then, the mortal remains are prepared for ritualistic burning.

In _Śrīvidyā tantra_, this last part of the funeral ceremony involves a lot of _bhāvana upāsana_. A _homa_ offering is done with five _mantras_ of _aghora_ etc. with a _bhāvana_ that the dead one shall reach _Śivasthāna_, (the state that has ensconced the thirty-three _tattvas_) the ultimate _mokṣa_. Another corpse bed is constructed using _darbha_ grass, _bilva_ tree sticks and the branches spreading towards the southern direction by _kulavr̥kśās_ (they are: _śleṣmātaka_ (_Cordia Dichotoma_),_ karnjākṣa _(_Pongamia Glavri_),_ akṣa _(_Terminalia Bellirica_),_ nimba _(_Azadiracta Indica_),_ aśvattha_ (_Ficus Religiosa_),_ kadamba _(_Neolamarckia Cadamba_),_ bilva _(_Aegle Marmelos_),_ vaṭa _(_Banyan_ tree i.e. _Ficus Benghalensis_),_ udumbara _(_Ficus Racemosa_),_ tintiṇī _(_Tamarindus Indica_)). This bed for the corpse is tied down with a cotton (three or nine) threaded string, the bed is then anointed with traditional herbal perfumes and the body is covered with new cloth. On this _śayana_ (bed), a _maṇḍala_ designed with _padma_,_ trikoṇa_,_ ṣaṭkoṇa_,_ karṇikā_, eight petal _kamala_ and upward lines are drawn and on that fresh flowers are strewn. On this, the body now is placed with its head facing the South direction, taking care that the head appears clearly. Now, this body is again sprinkled while chanting _rakṣaṇā mantra_. After this, with the chanting of _jvālāmālinī mantra_, the pyre is ceremoniously lit with the _mantra_ starting with _daha_ word. While the pyre is stably lit, the chanting continues with _aghora_ and _pāśupata mantras_. This is the ultimate _homa_ that any human can perform and hence this _homa_ shall continue until the entire body is completely burnt to ashes. While the _kartr̥_ is performing all these, the dead person’s relatives and belonging to same _gotra_ (clan) would also join in doing _stotras_ and _mantras_ of their choice. The _Kalpasūtras_ describe this momentous event that while the body is burning, the _yogigaṇa_ assemble therein and with _vibhāvana_ they ‘eat away’ the mortal remains. The _kartr̥_, while performing this ultimate _homa_ (_citāgni_) does the _bhāvana_ while chanting these verses from the _Kalpasūtrās_. While the last bit of the pyre is burning, the _kartr̥_ sits beside the _maṇḍala_ to do the _japa_ of two _mūlamantra_ of _Śrīvidyā_ as given by the divine _Guru_. At the very end, the _kartr̥_ does a _pūjā_ that is specific to his _kula_ or area. It is his ardent duty to guard the complete burning process and also the collection of the ashes from the pyre.

On the third, fifth or the seventh day, the _kartr̥_ revisits the _citāgni_ place and ascertains that the pyre has completely subsided. He then starts collecting the ashes from the leg side of the pyre and collects everything to store it in a new earthen pot. This pot head it tied with new cloth and is kept under a platform (_pīṭha_) in any one of these places convenient to him on the occasion: banks of a river, a clean water pond, nearby a temple, one’s own home surrounding etc. Around this _pīṭha_, three _mekhalās_ (steps/stratum) are constructed. On this, the departed _guru_’s/_sādhaka_’s disciple or devotee shall perform _gurumaṇḍala pūjā _three times a day until the 11th day. On the 11th day a procession (_utsava_) is taken out to commemorate the life and achievements of the dear departed. Towards the end of this procession, a pot full of water (_kalaśa_) and adequate _dakṣiṇā_ is given (_dāna_) to a very pious and pure hearted person (preferably a _samayī_ or _Śrīvidyā upāsaka_). From then on the _kartr̥_ shall compute the _ūṇa_ and _māsika_ ritual days based on accepted almanac and the _gurumaṇḍala pūjā _is performed. This shall happen for one full year. At the end of this year (_vārśika_) another ceremonious occasion is conducted and the buried earthen pot is extricated out of the three _mekhala_. This pot is then taken to a river tertiary (where its flow reaches the sea or ocean) and there on the banks the pot is finally laid to rest. Around this place, _kulavr̥kṣas_ are planted, _gurupratimā_ or _gurupādukā_ are then carved out of stones or wood and is installed near this resting place on a very auspicious day. Should the _kartr̥_ be fortunate to meet adepts in _kulāgama pāśupatamārga _persons or _sādhakas_ in _vāmamārga_ (eschatology), then he shall collect fifty darbha grass, spread them on the ground, the departed _preta_ is then invited back onto the _darbha_ grass bed and an important _kaula_ ritual is conducted. After this, the _preta_ shall acquire the Śambhu _bhāva_.

The all pious _Guru_, in his immeasurable compassion may teach all these to his devoted disciples. He may even help conduct such worthy event with the help of such disciples for the final emancipation of any true _sādhaka_ or his own _śiṣya_ on the last throes of his life. The _Kalpasūtras_ prescribe a very interesting ritual for this event. A beautiful and well-proportioned doll is prepared with rice floor. Into this doll, the _ātman_ of the near departing is drawn in (_ākarṣaṇa_). This is considered as the _pinḍa_ of that person. For this _pinḍa_, all the above rituals are performed in their order. After all these actions, this _pinḍa_ is kept on a _parākrama_ (_gurupāduka_ is also called as _parākrama_). After this the disciples and devotees shall offer separate _pinḍas_ made out of rice floor to the _pinḍa_ kept on the _gurupāduka_ while chanting the five _praṇava_ of _Śrividyā tantra_. After this, they shall offer _pūrṇāhuti_.

For the _siddhās_, their _antyayoga_ is in actuality the very Śambhu _bhāva_. For such persons, no _antyeṣṭi_ ritual is necessary. The devoted believer has to meditate this truth in his privacy. The _sūtrās_ definitely mention that _mānasika kriyā_ (focused and rightful rigorous mindful activity) is indeed the finest form of penance for the _yogi_. This is then accepted as the _lokarūḍhi_ (worldly wisdom). Thus, while all these external ritual activity is conducted, the _kartr̥_ has to put in every effort to do the _mānasika kriyā _simultaneously and respectively to its corresponding physical activity.

(The original tantric textual treatises are filled with many holographic errors. The study of these _vidhi_ would have been better if such errors were circumvented with more manuscript sources of the same or co relational texts)Now then, the mortal remains are prepared for ritualistic burning.

In _Śrīvidyā tantra_, this last part of the funeral ceremony involves a lot of _bhāvana upāsana_. A _homa_ offering is done with five _mantras_ of _aghora_ etc. with a _bhāvana_ that the dead one shall reach _Śivasthāna_, (the state that has ensconced the thirty-three _tattvas_) the ultimate _mokṣa_. Another corpse bed is constructed using _darbha_ grass, _bilva_ tree sticks and the branches spreading towards the southern direction by _kulavr̥kśās_ (they are: _śleṣmātaka_ (_Cordia Dichotoma_),_ karnjākṣa _(_Pongamia Glavri_),_ akṣa _(_Terminalia Bellirica_),_ nimba _(_Azadiracta Indica_),_ aśvattha_ (_Ficus Religiosa_),_ kadamba _(_Neolamarckia Cadamba_),_ bilva _(_Aegle Marmelos_),_ vaṭa _(_Banyan_ tree i.e. _Ficus Benghalensis_),_ udumbara _(_Ficus Racemosa_),_ tintiṇī _(_Tamarindus Indica_)). This bed for the corpse is tied down with a cotton (three or nine) threaded string, the bed is then anointed with traditional herbal perfumes and the body is covered with new cloth. On this _śayana_ (bed), a _maṇḍala_ designed with _padma_,_ trikoṇa_,_ ṣaṭkoṇa_,_ karṇikā_, eight petal _kamala_ and upward lines are drawn and on that fresh flowers are strewn. On this, the body now is placed with its head facing the South direction, taking care that the head appears clearly. Now, this body is again sprinkled while chanting _rakṣaṇā mantra_. After this, with the chanting of _jvālāmālinī mantra_, the pyre is ceremoniously lit with the _mantra_ starting with _daha_ word. While the pyre is stably lit, the chanting continues with _aghora_ and _pāśupata mantras_. This is the ultimate _homa_ that any human can perform and hence this _homa_ shall continue until the entire body is completely burnt to ashes. While the _kartr̥_ is performing all these, the dead person’s relatives and belonging to same _gotra_ (clan) would also join in doing _stotras_ and _mantras_ of their choice. The _Kalpasūtras_ describe this momentous event that while the body is burning, the _yogigaṇa_ assemble therein and with _vibhāvana_ they ‘eat away’ the mortal remains. The _kartr̥_, while performing this ultimate _homa_ (_citāgni_) does the _bhāvana_ while chanting these verses from the _Kalpasūtrās_. While the last bit of the pyre is burning, the _kartr̥_ sits beside the _maṇḍala_ to do the _japa_ of two _mūlamantra_ of _Śrīvidyā_ as given by the divine _Guru_. At the very end, the _kartr̥_ does a _pūjā_ that is specific to his _kula_ or area. It is his ardent duty to guard the complete burning process and also the collection of the ashes from the pyre.

On the third, fifth or the seventh day, the _kartr̥_ revisits the _citāgni_ place and ascertains that the pyre has completely subsided. He then starts collecting the ashes from the leg side of the pyre and collects everything to store it in a new earthen pot. This pot head it tied with new cloth and is kept under a platform (_pīṭha_) in any one of these places convenient to him on the occasion: banks of a river, a clean water pond, nearby a temple, one’s own home surrounding etc. Around this _pīṭha_, three _mekhalās_ (steps/stratum) are constructed. On this, the departed _guru_’s/_sādhaka_’s disciple or devotee shall perform _gurumaṇḍala pūjā _three times a day until the 11th day. On the 11th day a procession (_utsava_) is taken out to commemorate the life and achievements of the dear departed. Towards the end of this procession, a pot full of water (_kalaśa_) and adequate _dakṣiṇā_ is given (_dāna_) to a very pious and pure hearted person (preferably a _samayī_ or _Śrīvidyā upāsaka_). From then on the _kartr̥_ shall compute the _ūṇa_ and _māsika_ ritual days based on accepted almanac and the _gurumaṇḍala pūjā _is performed. This shall happen for one full year. At the end of this year (_vārśika_) another ceremonious occasion is conducted and the buried earthen pot is extricated out of the three _mekhala_. This pot is then taken to a river tertiary (where its flow reaches the sea or ocean) and there on the banks the pot is finally laid to rest. Around this place, _kulavr̥kṣas_ are planted, _gurupratimā_ or _gurupādukā_ are then carved out of stones or wood and is installed near this resting place on a very auspicious day. Should the _kartr̥_ be fortunate to meet adepts in _kulāgama pāśupatamārga _persons or _sādhakas_ in _vāmamārga_ (eschatology), then he shall collect fifty darbha grass, spread them on the ground, the departed _preta_ is then invited back onto the _darbha_ grass bed and an important _kaula_ ritual is conducted. After this, the _preta_ shall acquire the Śambhu _bhāva_.

The all pious _Guru_, in his immeasurable compassion may teach all these to his devoted disciples. He may even help conduct such worthy event with the help of such disciples for the final emancipation of any true _sādhaka_ or his own _śiṣya_ on the last throes of his life. The _Kalpasūtras_ prescribe a very interesting ritual for this event. A beautiful and well-proportioned doll is prepared with rice floor. Into this doll, the _ātman_ of the near departing is drawn in (_ākarṣaṇa_). This is considered as the _pinḍa_ of that person. For this _pinḍa_, all the above rituals are performed in their order. After all these actions, this _pinḍa_ is kept on a _parākrama_ (_gurupāduka_ is also called as _parākrama_). After this the disciples and devotees shall offer separate _pinḍas_ made out of rice floor to the _pinḍa_ kept on the _gurupāduka_ while chanting the five _praṇava_ of _Śrividyā tantra_. After this, they shall offer _pūrṇāhuti_.

For the _siddhās_, their _antyayoga_ is in actuality the very Śambhu _bhāva_. For such persons, no _antyeṣṭi_ ritual is necessary. The devoted believer has to meditate this truth in his privacy. The _sūtrās_ definitely mention that _mānasika kriyā_ (focused and rightful rigorous mindful activity) is indeed the finest form of penance for the _yogi_. This is then accepted as the _lokarūḍhi_ (worldly wisdom). Thus, while all these external ritual activity is conducted, the _kartr̥_ has to put in every effort to do the _mānasika kriyā _simultaneously and respectively to its corresponding physical activity.

(The original tantric textual treatises are filled with many holographic errors. The study of these _vidhi_ would have been better if such errors were circumvented with more manuscript sources of the same or co relational texts)


## Paraśurāma Kalpasūtra
**The _Paraśurāma Kalpasūtra_**

Towards the end of this text, the author says ‘_pareca śāstrānuśiṣṭāḥ_’ meaning, ‘I have said thus out of my intellect and cogitation, but it shall be correlated with other textual sources too’. Rāmeśvarasūri (1831 AD), who was a _praśiṣya_ of the great Bhāskaramakhīndra (who authored the all-time useful text on _Sahasrarnāma bhāṣya_) has composed a _Vr̥ttī_ (a textual compilation that describes a tenet of a discipline). Towards its end, in order to substantiate his arguments, he has given an _udāhṛti_ (supportive corollary). This comprises of the _antyeṣṭi vidhi_ from _Trikūṭārahasya_ text, _Kaulaśrāddha vidhi_ from the 56th chapter in _Devīrahasya_ work’s Rudrayāmala, the famed Devī-Bhairava conversation extract that delineates the _Prāyaścitta Vidhi_ from the 13th chapter in the work _Svatantratantra_, the _Mahāsāntapana Vrata Vidhi_ from the _Br̥hatvāmakeśvara Tantra_, the _Maṇḍalalakṣaṇa_ from _Yoginītantra_ and from his own works he cites two textual sources to quote _prakīrṇakaviśaya_ (cross-referenced discussions). Compiling all these he then has composed his _Vr̥tti_.

Out of this, the _Antyeṣṭividhi_ (and the proceeding _śrāddha_) and _Kaulaśrāddhavidhi_ will now be briefly delineated.

## Antyeṣṭividhi

Performance of _antyeṣṭi_ for ones _Guru_,_ Śrīvidyā sādhaka_ is of prime importance to any _upāsaka_. If this duty is shirked, then there is no _maṇḍalaprāpti_ for such a person, even though he may be a superior _sādhaka_. Here, the term _maṇḍala_ has two meanings: a _maṇḍala_ means a _kumārī_ (maiden), _baṭuka_ (=_vaṭu_, means a _brahmacārin_), two _suvāsinī_ (two women who have built up their family effectively as good wives, daughter and mothers. This is their _vr̥ata_, the word _suvāsinī_ is a composite of two segments: _su_=most propitious, + _vāsini_ = dwellers, meaning she who dwells on auspiciousness), five _sāmayika_ (an _sāmayika_ is a _Śrīvidyā upāsaka_). A _maṇḍala_ also means a congregation of all these. To _pūjā_ offered to these is known as _maṇḍalapūjā_. The other meaning of _maṇḍala_ is the attainment of _mokṣa padavi_. For any _upāsaka/sādhaka_, should he gain a place in this _maṇḍala samūha _(congregation), one of his prime duty is to perform the _antyeṣṭi_ if and when needed. The author also gives an extended implication on this argument; if a _śiṣya_ does not perform the _antyeṣṭi_ of the _Guru_ in proper time, then he does not belong to the _dīkṣākula_, thus making his _sādhana_ null and void. For such a duty less person, the _maṇḍalasamūha_ does not even help perform his _kaulaśrāddha_. (Details about _kaulaśrāddha_ is discussed later on in this article).

The departed _Guru/sādhaka_ enters the _maṇḍala_ (emancipation) if the eschatological rites called _antyeṣṭi_ is promptly performed for them within first _māsa_ (lunar month) or first _vārṣika_ (year = 12 lunar months) after the _mr̥tasūtaka_ (proscriptive days after the death of a person) days end. _Tantraśāstra_ segments three types of deceased _dīkṣita_: the _vīradūta_ whose _bāhyasaṃskāra_ (worldly eschatological rituals) is not performed at all, (_Śrīvidyā upāsaka_ is also called as a _vīra_ for, he controls his senses. In _Śivatattva_, the senses are termed as _vīra_, hence the _upāsaka_ who controls them is also termed as _vīradūta_). The second variety is the _vīra_ whose _bāhyasaṃskāra_ is performed in correct order. The third variety is the _vīra_ whose _bāhyasaṃskāra_ is done along with special tantric _antyeṣṭi_ rituals. However, _antyeṣṭi_ is indeed a variety of _bāhyasaṃskāra_._ Tantraśāstra _provides many resolutions for whom _antyeṣṭi_ was not performed for a reason. For such departed, the _kartr̥_ should do the _japa_ of the _mūlamantra_ for ten thousand times and afterwards the _śrāddha_ should be done. If such a person’s name (_dīkṣānāma_) is unknown, his worldly name can be used all through the rituals. _Tīrtha śrāddha_ should be done during all days of important cosmic incidence, on death anniversaries (according to traditional almanac). _Śāstra_ then declares that such a departed _upāsaka_ henceforth belongs to the genealogy of the _kartr̥_ and he attains the _vīratva_. The _bāhyasaṃskāra_ is performed to get elevated from the _pretāvastha_ (release from the spectral body) and the _antyeṣṭi_ is performed to dwell in the _maṇḍala_. Both these mean that the departed can attain _vīratva_ after the _sūtaka_ days are over and the _sapiṇḍīkāraṇa_ (unification of all parts of the lamented spectral body) is done for the departed.

Now, the _kartr̥_ takes a holy bath (_śucirbhūtam_), finds a peaceful place and sits there in his _āsana_ (a square piece made out of cloth or wood or grass etc and reserved only for such purposes) facing the North direction. He then does the _saṃkalpa_ (ritualistically takes into his account the various _karmas_ (activities) he has to perform). He gives _varaṇa_ (formal invite) for the _ācārya_ (the one who also guides him during the process) and _brahman_ (the one who oversees everything). If in a situation, both are not present, then the _kartr̥_ gives the _varaṇa_ to _ācārya_. He then conducts the _navāvaraṇa pūjā_ (_Śrīcakra yantra_ has nine enclosures, each is connoted as an _āvaraṇa_, specific _pūjā_ is prescribed for each of these).

The _kartr̥_ now is empowered to conduct the next bit of ritual which is indeed centric to the whole process. He takes two measure of his spread palms (from tip of one of his spread out palm’s thumb to the other palm’s little finger tip, both palms held side by side) which would come to nearly 18 inches, and creates a _vedi_ (platform) and on that, he draws a _Śrīcakra_ out of _kumkuma_ (the red powder make out of traditional substances) and does a measure of _pūjā_ to it. Then, a doll of half of that size is modeled out of _kuśa_ (_darbha_) grass, with its head hanging down (kept on the _Śrīcakra_). The _vīra_ is then ascribed into this doll (_āvāhana_) with suitable _mantras_. This doll, until its final offering is thus named after the departed person (_vīra_). If the _vīra_’s name is unknown then the generic name of ‘Gaganānanda Nātha’ is ascribed to it.

The _kartr̥_ now calls aloud the name of the _vīra_ facing the doll (kept on the _Śrīcakra_) and whispers these verses in its ears; ‘O (the name or Gaganānanda Nātha) _vīra_! I prostrate before you with reverence! Do come and dwell here on the doll on this _Śrīcakra_. I have arranged this momentous holy occasion entirely for your beneficence. You are about to ascend to an ultimate bliss. Now, you enter this _maṇḍala_, cruise around various words within this _maṇḍala_, and head towards the _paramapada sadgati_ (final emancipation).

And then the _kartr̥_ performs the six types of _aṅganyāsa_ and _karanyāsa_ (ritualistic inglobation of the parts of the body and soul) for the _darbha_ doll and the six types of _tanmātrā nyāsā_ (they are _śabdākarṣiṇī_,_ rūpākarṣiṇī_,_ gandhākarṣiṇī_,_ rasākarṣiṇī _and_ sparśākarṣiṇī_). With this, the body is consecrated. In the heart region, he does the _cittākarṣiṇī tanmātra nyāsa_. On the tip of the scalp, the _nyāsa_ with the _mantra_ ‘_krīṃ kālyāi namaḥ_’ is performed. On the throat region, the _aṅkuśa_ weapon is symbolized by a _nyāsa_ with the _mantra_ ‘_krom marmakr̥ntinyai namaḥ_’. On the _brahmarandhra_ (the inner sanctum on the tip of the scalp) the _nyāsa_ with the _mantra_ ‘_āṃ hrīṃ prāṇākarṣiṇyai namaḥ_’ is done. Now the doll acquires the name _kuśapuruṣa_. In the mouth of this _kuśapuruṣa_, with the _mantra nyāsa_ of ‘_āṃ hrīṃ_’ is repeated. After all these, _mantras_ like _kāladharma_ etc. are recited with raised voice. At the end, there is an interesting episodic prescription where in the _kartr̥_ cries aloud for the death of this _kuśapuruṣa_ with profuse tears !

Now the dead _vīra_’s spirit is in the _kuśapuruṣa_. The _kartr̥_ addresses him with these words; o _kuśapuruṣa_, the _kāladharma_ is this death and it has to happen because the _kāla_ ordains this. There is no escape from this nor should one futilely try to escape from this. Now that you have been elevated from your mortal remains, you have acquired immeasurable strength (_śakti_) and hence you are now the very embodiment of Śiva. Because you have attained the final identity with your real power, you have now conjoined with the Mahāśakti (Śīve Pārvati, the consort) and attained the _paśutva_ state of being. Shed all your previous connections with the help of ‘_guruvākya_’ (_gurupādukā mantra_ etc.) and become the very embodiment of Śiva (Śiva _rūpa_)’. Thus saying, the _kartr̥_ then does the _saṃkalpa_ to perform the _dehasaṃskāra_ (offering of _kuśapuruṣa_ to the ritual fire) in _Śivāgni_. He now performs the _nyāsa_ on himself: he uses the _Śrīcakreśī Lalitā Tripurasundarī mantra_ for this _nyāsa_ (there is very elaborate system for this kind of _nyāsa_ which is also done during the most important _navāvaraṇa pūjā tarpaṇa vidhi_ during _Śrīcakrārcana_ ritual). The _kartr̥_ now does the _cakra pūjā _with a special _arghya_ (offer of holy water with suitable verse), for this he uses the _vīra_’s name (_amukānandanātha vīrāya namaḥ_) and offers the _tarpaṇa_ three times. He continues this ritual with sixteen (elaborate _pūjā_) or five (compact and small) kinds of _pūjā_ offering and gives the _tarpaṇa_ using the _mantra_ ‘_Lalitā Mahātripurasundarīṃ tarpayāmi namaḥ_’.

_Gārhapatyāgni_ is the fire that was first ritualistically kindled during the marriage ceremony of an _upāsaka_. Now, this _agni_ is indeed an integral part of many incidences of his life too. This _agni_ is now installed on the side of the vedi where the _kuśapuruṣa_ is consecrated. An _agnimaṇḍala_ is then reconstructed therein. Into this, the divine mother Devī is invited to dwell and accept the offerings. Her _pūjā_ and three times _tarpaṇa_ are done. In this _agnimaṇḍala_, a _homa_ is done using 108 _muttuga_ (_audumbara_ tree) sticks. The ghee is offerd while doing a _homa_ with two large ‘spoons’. They are known as ‘_sr̥k_’ and ‘_śr̥va_’. Out of these, the _sr̥k_ is filled with cow’s ghee, the _kuśapuruṣa_ is kept on this. In that doll, the right leg of the _kuśapuruṣa_ is kept on the other ‘spoon’ _sr̥va_. Both the spoons are now joined one above the other. While saying ‘_vaṣat_’, and chanting the _mantra_ ‘_pūrṇāhutiṃ pradāsyāmi amukānandanātha vīrāya svāhā_’ the _kuśapuruśa_ on the _sr̥k_ and _śrva_ is offered reverentially to the _mr̥tāgni_ which is the very embodiment of _parāśaktirūpa_. After this awesome offering, a special prayer is to be done for the attainment of Brahman for the _vīra_ with these verses ‘_tvaṃ vīrāgnau hutōsmin vai malaṃ bhautarūpakaṃ kārmaṃ mānsampyeva māyikaṃ cātaraṃ taṭhā | āṇavaṃ ca visr̥jyāgnau dhūmmārgeṇa cāṭhavā tejomārgeṇordhvalōkaṃ prāptaṃ te paramaṃ padaṃ | punrāvr̥tti rahitaṃ vraja mantraprabhāvataḥ | _After reciting this _mantra_, the _kartr̥_ has to do the _japa_ of his _mūlamantra_,_ gurupādukā mantra_ etc and finally offer the _kuśapuruṣa_ into the _homakuṇḍa_ (_kuṇḍa_ = pit). After this _pūrṇāhuti_, 108 _audumbara samittu āhuti_ is to be offered. This completes the later part of the _antyeṣṭi vidhi homa_.

Now, _sāmayika_ (_Śrīvidyā upāsakas_) are to be invited along with _ācāryas_ and their _satkāra_ (cordial reception), an _udvāsanā_ (relocation of their roles) is performed. From that day, the forth day is reckoned from the traditional almanac. On this day, a _kaula śrāddha_ is done for the _vīra_ along with _maṇḍalamelana śrāddha_. A (copper) vessel is kept separately and into it divinities called ‘_viśvedevā_’ are invoked. This represents _vīra_. From now onwards, _vīra_ means a broader sense of the term. _Vīra_ would now mean _pitāmahā_ (_guru_’s_ guru_ of the _vīra_),_ pitā _(ones_ guru_) and _vīra_ himself, all together constitute _viśvedeva_. If in the event, the three _vīras_ were ritually consecrated on the lines of the deliberations described above, then each of them a separate _maṇḍalamelana_ is performed so that they attain the status of _guruvarga_ like Mitreśānanda Nātha etc. For this the _kartr̥_ has to do the _japa_ of the _mūlamantra_ for 10 thousand times for each of these _gurus_ and after this the _maṇḍalamelana śrāddha_ is peformed. Now an important factor is to be noted. The _vīra_ for whom these deliberations are done need not be of the same _guruparampara_ or lineage of the _kartr̥_. The _śāstra_ provides a very important provision that, in order to do continue to do such essential _sādhanā_ in _tantra_, the _vīra_ and his _Guru_ lineage now are deemed as belonging to the _dīkṣita vaṃśa _of the _kartr̥_. Even if the _vīra_ and his gurus belong to a known _dīkṣita_ clan, then the _kartr̥_ is now empowered to perform the _maṇḍalamelana śrāddha_ for them.

Before coming to the delineation of the _kaula śrāddha vidhi_ (system description), a little bit of its speciality may be mentioned herein. In this _śrāddha_, the _vīra_ is kept to face the west direction and the _pūjā_ is done. The _maṇḍala_ used to offer _pādyā_ (holy water poured in a ritualistic way) is in a triangle shape. This is also the _pātrāsādana_ (negotiation of the vessel) _maṇḍala_. The vessel for the _pitr̥_ is first negotiated and then only the vessel of the _vīra_ is taken up. Here, five _brāhmaṇas_ are to be invited (one representing each: _vīra_,_ pitā_,_ pitāmahā_, two _viśvedevas_). In an unavoidable situation, when all these five cannot be found, then, one _brāhmaṇa_ representing two _viśvedevas_, one representing _pitāmahā_ and one for the _vīra_ can be invited. The _pātrahavana_ (consecration of the _śrāddha_ vessels) are just like in the _kaulaśrāddha_. In order to do the _kaulaśrāddha_ for the _vīra_, the _jalotsarga_ (a special ritual done during any _śrāddha_) is performed for the _mantra_ starting from ‘_saṃvinmaye_’ and ends with ‘_tadbhaveccivaṃ_’ (the entire _mantra_ is given further down in this article). After this, the _mantra_ starting with the word ‘_adyaprabhr̥ti_’ is chanted while the _vīrapātra kuladravya_ (contents of vessel of _vīra_) is being transferred to the _pitr̥pātra_. In all the _upacāra_ for the _vīra_ during the conduct of _kaulaśrāddha_ (starting from the very first _upacāra_,_ dīpaupacāra _and beyond) and also for the offering of the vessel (_pātrasamarpaṇa_), the _mantra_ ‘_amukāya_ (the name of the _vīra_)_ vīrāya svāhaḥ_’ is to be used. After _vīra_ comes his _pitā_, for this only ‘_mitreśarūpāya svāhaḥ_’ is to be used. And for the _pitāmahā_,_ ṣaṣṭhīśarūpāya svāhaḥ_ is used. After this the regular model ritual is to be followed. There are two _homa_ for this _śrāddha_ and all other ritualistic activity resembles the vedic pattern in this _kaulaśrāddha_.

## Kaulaśrāddha viḍhi

_Tantra śāstra_ exalts the virtues of the _kaulaśrāddha_. It says that just by hearing about this ushers in the divine blessings. It goes further and says that even if thousends of other _śrāddhās_ are done, if _kaulaśrāddha_ is not done, then all that would be rendered waste, for, the _pitr̥s_ and _viśvedevas_ are not satisfied with just other vedic _śrāddha_! The _Śāktatantra_ texts extoll this ritual and indeed describe it in unequivocal manner.

The first _kaula śrāddha_ day is to be reakoned on or after a day from the day and time of death of the _vīr̥a_ with the aid of traditional alamanac (_pañcāṅga_). On that day, the _kartr̥_ should cleanse himself with bath and daily toiletries. He then gives _nimantraṇa_ (formal invitation) to four or two _brāhmaṇas_. After performing _śuddha saṅkalpa_, the _kartr̥_, before the _viśeṣārghya pātra _(there will be two special vessels rekoned as _pitr̥ pātra_ in between the general _viśeṣār̥ghya pātra_ and Devī _viśeṣārghya pātra_. All the _mantras_ and rituals done to consecrate the special _arghyapātra_ (_viśeṣārghya pātra_) vessel should be repeated to consecrate _viśvedeva pātra_ and _pitr̥ pātra_ (_pātra_=vessel). In any tantric _pūjā_,_ suvāsinī pūjā_ (a _pūjā_ for a housewife who has lead a pious life doing all the religious rigours called _vrata_) is an essential and integral part. In this _kaula śrāddha_, at this juncture, the last part of that _pūjā_ ritual is to be performed now. After this, a _brāhmaṇa_ is invited in lieu of a Caryā Nātha (an ancient _siddha_) embodiment and on him the _viśvedeva_ is ascribed (_āvāhana_). If all the five other _brāhmaṇas_ are also invited for the occasion, then each of them will take Ṣaṣṭhūśa Nātha (for _pitāmahā_), Uḍḍīśa Nātha (for _prapitāmahā_) and Mitreśa Nātha (other three ancient _siddhas_) for pitr̥ positions. However, if only one _brāhmaṇa_ is there, then all the three can be ascribed on him and the _śrāddha_ can be continued.

The _brāhmaṇas_ are first offerd a seat (_āsana_) and after prostrating before him (or them), these words of welcome is spoken (actually these are verses and I have given their translations herein) ‘O revered _viśvedevas_, I welcome you, I wholeheartedly offer to you this ‘_kṣaṇa_’ (ceremonious invite). Please do dwell peacefully until the rituals are concluded. With affection and peace, kindly accept my humble ‘_kṣaṇa_’. After having said that, they are given the following _maṇḍala_ to be seated: square _mandala_ for _viśvedevas_, circular _maṇḍala_ for the _pitr̥s_ (_pitr̥_,_ pitāmahāḥ_ and _prapitāmahāḥ_). Their feet are washed, _sāmānya arghya_ (from the general _arghya_ vessel) is offered, _ācamana_ rituals are offered along with _madhuparka_ (special variety of banana dipped in raw honey), _snāna_ (a facility for cleansing), _vastra_ (new cloths) etc. As the last thing, the _dīpapūjā_ is offered. All _pujas_ done for the _pitr̥s_ are repeated for the _viśvedevas_. And later, the _viśvedeva_ vessel is offerd with the verse ‘O _viśvedeva_ ! This is offered to you (_svāhaḥ_)’. The _pitr̥_ vessels are offered likewise to the _brāhmaṇas_ who are now acknowledge in the positions of the three _pitr̥s_. The great Rāmeśvarasūri who belonged to the disciple lineage of Bhāskarācārya gives a special note here that, while in the vedic traditions, there are ritualistic _mantras_ even for offering the things, for _sāktas_ only _svāhaḥ_ is enough and adequate.

These are the _mantra_ veses that are recited while the _viśvedevas_ (on square _maṇḍala_) and _pitr̥s_ (in circular _maṇḍala_) are offered _pūjās_,_ bhojana _vessels (food plates and such), water, _hastodaka_ (water to wash their hands and feet);

_Samvinmaye mahāpātre ānandamayabhojyakaṃ |_

_Bhoktā tvam puruṣaḥ sākśī mahāśktirmaheśvaraḥ ||_

_Sarvamannam śaktimayam bhoktām sākṣāt paraḥ svayaṃ |_

_Tasmāt sarvam śivaḥ sākṣāt bhoktā dātā ca bhojyakaṃ ||_

_Viśvedevā devatā no bhunjan tvatra makhe mama |_

_Yāvacchakyam tāvadiha bhoktavym svasthamānasaiḥ ||_

_Peyam khādyam bhakṣyabhojyam sarvam vastu samarpitaṃ |_

_Pitr̥ṇām paramānandahetave tad bhavecchivaṃ ||_

(The eater, eating, the process of eating are all one and same; that is ‘_annam_’ the holy offered food. The person who has offered and the person who has taken part are all one and the same and thus is the very embodiment of Śiva (_Śivamayaṃ_). In this holy a_nna yajña_, it is _viśvedevas_ who are partaking the offered food. O _brāhmaṇas_, I humbly request you to eat, drink, and take all the _bhakṣyabhojyas_ (an explanation is given for this term after this). The very essence of this action will please the _pitr̥s_, and thus becomes Śiva full (_Śivamaya_)).

(Information on the _bhakṣyabhojya_: the food that is served on these occasions are of six types: _Peya_, that liquid which is sipped (eg. Sugarcane juice) (_coṣya_):_ Pānaka_, those liquids that are drunk (for eg. Water, _rasam,_a spicy hot liquid preparation which are also mixed with rice to eat); _Lehya_, all those which are licked and enjoyed; _Bhojya_, the staple diet eating things like rice etc.; _Bhakṣya_: special adjucts that resemble snacks like those which are fried, baked balls etc.; _Carvya,_ a special kinds of food suppliments which are also called as _khādya_).

Thus said, the _śrāddha kartr̥_ pours one spoon of water (_uddharaṇa_) for both the _viśvedevasthāna_ and _pitr̥sthāna_. This is called as an _āpośana_. The act is called _jalotsarga_. The _brāhmaṇās_ who are occupying both these postures now would eat to their fulfillment (of the _bhakṣya_,_ bhojya_,_ khādya_,_ peya_,_ pānaka_, and some more items of food called _kuladravya_ (food specialities that are specific to that _kaula_ tradition for at least two generations). All the while, the _śrāddha kartr̥_ does the prayer and encouragement to the _brāhmaṇas_ that this very act would now satisfy the _viśvedevā_ and the _pitr̥s_. This_ anna yajña_ is nearing its fulfillment. At the end of the feast, an _uttarāpośana_ is given (concluding event with another _uddharaṇa_ spoon of water offered with suitable _mantras_). A _tambūla_ (beetle leaves and _areca catechu_ seeds), with adequate _dakṣiṇā_ (money, usually the local currency, but in rare cases gold coins) are given reverentially (places on the sides of the _brāhmaṇa_ seats). A prayer is now done: “O divinity, with this activity that I have now undertaken, may you grant the wish that the _pitr̥_,_ pitāmahā_,_ prapitāmahā _attain the _paramapada_, the final blissful _pitr̥loka_. A _pradakśiṇā namaskāra_ (holding the _arghya_ vessel and an _uddharana_ spoon inside, the _kartr̥_ goes around (three times) the _brāhmaṇas_) is also performed.

With the following verse, the release (_udvāsana_) of the _brāhmaṇas_ are done:

_Yathāāgatam ca pitaro gacchantvasmān mahāmakhāt |_

_Viśvairdevaiśca sahitāḥ prsannāḥ santu me ciraṃ ||_

Now, the _sāmayikas_ (_Śrīvidyā_ practioners) are offered special _pūjā_ and the entire activity is surrenderd to Goddess Lalitādevī.

Rāmeśvarasūri, after describing and prescribing the _kaulaśrāddha_ and _antyeṣṭi_, stresses their importance thus; both these (_antyeṣṭī_ and _kaulaśrāddha_) are formed based on the _sūtrās_ in the _Paraśurāma Kalpasūtra _and thus it is most authoritative and essential duty (for a _upāsaka_ to follow and practice). In that _śāstra_, the act of not doing it is described as a defect and the _śāstra_ decries it. In the other treatise _Tripurārahasya_ too it is quite so and that treatise goes on to say that there are other things also that ought to be done. Thus, it may be inferred here that for those _upāsakas_ who follow _Paraśurāma Kalpasūtra_ this _śrāddha_ and _iṣṭi_ is essential. The _Tripurārahasya_ text also makes a provision that (since there are other alternatives), the performance of these _śrāddha_ and _iṣṭi_ is not entirely an absolute necessity but a preferred activity. There is a corroboration in the vedic _śrāddha_ practice too. The _Āpasthamba Kalpasūtra _and other _ācāryas_, in their _sūtrās_, do not generally agree with each other in their prescriptions and activity essentials, but for one ecception, that is, they all quote and follow the _sūtra_ of Bhāradhvāja. A similar inference can also be drawn in the present tantric context. The spirit, mood and desire for these entire activity springs from the anxity that not performing would make the practice that much poorer and worthless.

This is a moral and philosophical tenet in tantric practice; the very birth is to aquire _upāsanā_ that would enable the _sādhaka_ to attain _maṇḍala_._ Maṇḍala _in_ tantra _means a state that is superior to _Brahmaloka_, attainment of three _ogha_ (multitudes), and total annulment of rebirth. _Antyeṣṭi_ and _śrāddha_ are the most essential activity to attain this _mahāpuruśārtha_ (_maṇḍala praveśa_). If this is not performed, then, it is little wonder that the _śāstras_ proclaim this mawkishness as ‘_atidūśita_’ (meaning totally decriable). Thus the conduct of _antyeṣṭi_ and (_kaula śrāddha_) are absolutely essential for a _sādhaka_.

What more is to be said, then?